CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF PALO ALTO
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
   Incorporated April 23, 1894
1950 Charter
   Adopted by Stats. 1950, Ch. 7
   As Amended
      Stats. 1909, p. 1175
   Amended:
      Stats. 1911, p. 2040
      Stats. 1917, p. 1859
      Stats. 1921, p. 2167
      Stats. 1933, p. 2746
      Stats. 1950, Ch. 7
      Stats. 1951, Ch. 40
      Stats. 1961, Ch. 190
      Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, ACR 20
      Stats. 1965, Ch. 136, ACR 161
      Stats. 1967, Ch. 103, ACR 106
      Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, ACR 143
      Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, ACR 192
      Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, ACR 117
      Filed with Secretary of State, July 1, 1976
      Filed with Secretary of State, November 26, 1976
      Filed with Secretary of State, July 17, 1978
      Filed with Secretary of State, May 30, 1979
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 10, 1982
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 9, 1983
   Note: This is the 1950 Charter adopted by Stats. 1950, Ch. 7. All changes
since 1950 are indicated. Catchlines have been supplied as the original had no
catchlines.
   OFFICE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY
   August 2, 1965
   CHARTER
   OF THE
   CITY OF PALO ALTO
Article I. Boundaries of the City
   The boundaries of the city of Palo Alto shall contain that territory within
its present borders. The territory embraced therein may be added to or
diminished in accordance with the laws of the state of California governing the
annexation and exclusion of territory by municipalities.
Article II. Powers
   The city of Palo Alto, by and through its council and other officials, shall
have and may exercise all powers necessary and appropriate to a municipal
corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants which are not prohibited
by the Constitution of the State of California or by this charter, and which it
would be competent for this charter to set forth specifically, and the
specification herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be exclusive
of, or any limitation upon, the general grant of powers heretofore or hereafter
granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution or general laws.
Article III. Council
Sec. 1.   Powers.
   All powers herein granted to and vested in the city of Palo Alto shall,
except as herein otherwise provided, be exercised by a council to be designated
the council of the city of Palo Alto; and said council shall, except as herein
otherwise provided, have the power to fix and establish the method and manner
in which such powers shall be exercised.
Sec. 2.   Number - Term.
   Commencing January 1, 2019, said council shall be composed of seven members,
each of whom shall be an elector and shall have been a resident of the city of
Palo Alto for at least thirty days next preceding the final filing date for
nomination papers for such office. The members of said council shall be known
as councilmen, councilwomen, or council members and their terms of office shall
be four years, commencing on the first day of January next succeeding their
election. The terms of council members who took office on July 1, 1977, shall
expire on December 31, 1981. Commencing January 1, 1992, no person shall be
eligible to serve consecutively in more than two full terms of office as a
member of the council. Any partial term of office longer than two years shall
be deemed a full term. Terms of office commenced before January 1, 1992, shall
not be counted when determining eligibility under this section.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20 and by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 161 and by
Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72, and by amendment filed with Secretary of State,
July 1, 1976 and by amendment filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979
and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992, and
amendment passed by electorate November 4, 2014)
Sec. 3.   Time of election.
   A regular election shall be held in the city of Palo Alto on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year,
commencing with the year 2012, and the same shall be known as the general
municipal election. All other municipal elections that may be called under the
authority of this charter, or by the general laws, shall be known as special
elections.
   Notwithstanding four-year city council member term limit set forth in
Article III, section 2 of this charter, any city council members whose term of
office would have expired prior to 2012 shall continue in their offices until
December 31, 2012 or until their successors are elected and qualified.
   Notwithstanding four-year city council member term limit set forth in
Article III, section 2 of this charter, any city council members whose term of
office would have expired prior to 2014 shall continue in their offices until
December 31, 2014, or their successors are elected and qualified.
(Amendment filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979 and amendment
passed by electorate November 2, 2010)
Sec. 4.   Elections.
   All elections called and held in said city shall be held and conducted in
manner and form as required by the general laws of the state governing
elections within municipalities, provided that the council may by ordinance
determine the manner of holding elections, the number of voting precincts, the
naming of election officers, and shall act as a canvassing board to canvass the
results of such elections.
Sec. 5.   Council to fix time and place of meetings.
   Said council shall fix a time and place for its regular meetings and may
adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
Sec. 6.   Quorum - Absent members - Fines.
   A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business; but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members, and impose such fines as it may deem proper upon
members refusing or neglecting to attend such meetings.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20)
Sec. 7.   Majority vote necessary.
   No ordinance or resolution shall be passed, no appointment made, no officer
removed, and no contract shall be awarded without the affirmative vote of a
majority of the council.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20)
Sec. 8.   Mayor - Election - Duties.
   The council shall, at its first meeting in January, elect one of its number
as its presiding officer, who shall have the title of mayor, and one of its
number to be vice-mayor, who shall serve for one year after their election, and
until their successors are elected and qualified. The mayor and vice-mayor
shall serve until election and qualification of their successors. The mayor
shall preside at all meetings of the council, shall sign all official documents
when the signature of the council or mayor is required by law, and shall act as
official head of the city on public or ceremonial occasions. The mayor shall
not have any regular administrative duties but may act as ex officio member of
all boards, commissions, and committees. The mayor shall vote as other members
of the council, but shall have no power of veto. The mayor shall have the power
to administer the oaths and affirmations. The mayor shall perform such other
duties as from time to time are assigned by the council. When the mayor is
absent from any meeting of the council or incapable of performing his or her
duties, the vice-mayor shall, during such time, have the full powers of the
mayor. A vacancy in the positions of mayor or vice-mayor shall be filled by the
council for the unexpired term.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with Secretary
of State, December 12, 1979 and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State,
January 21, 1992)
Sec. 9.   Officers appointed by council - Boards, committees, and commissions.
   The council shall appoint a city manager, clerk, attorney, and auditor, and,
except as otherwise provided, may by ordinance or otherwise create or abolish
offices, boards, committees, or commissions, and provide for their manner of
appointment, their tenure, and the duties which they shall perform.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, 2-19-65 and by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68
and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with the Secretary of
State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 10.   Vacancy on council.
   A vacancy on the council may be filled by a majority of the remaining
members of the council, and the appointee shall hold office until the first day
of January succeeding the next election at which council members are to be
elected. At the next election succeeding any vacancy a council member shall be
elected to serve for the unexpired term. If the council fails to fill such
vacancy within 60 days of such vacancy or the council chooses to fill such
vacancy by election, it shall forthwith call a special election, at which a
council member shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 12, 1979)
Sec. 11.   Levy of taxes - Rate - Increase in levy.
   The council shall by ordinance provide for the assessment of city property
for city taxes, the equalization and correction of the assessment, the
collection, payment and enforcement of the taxes, including delinquent taxes,
and the redemption of property from sale or other penalty for nonpayment of
city taxes. On or before September first in each year, it shall levy such tax
as may be necessary to raise revenue for the maintenance and operation of the
city and the several departments during the fiscal year, but such tax levy for
all municipal purposes, except for the payment of interest and principal of the
bonded debt and the contribution of the city to employees' retirement, shall
not exceed the sum of one hundred twenty-five cents upon each one hundred
dollars of assessed valuation as the same appears upon the assessment roll. If
in the judgment of a majority of the council it should be necessary to provide
a revenue in excess of the sum realized from the levy herein provided, the
question of the levy of an additional property tax shall be submitted to the
electors, and a special election may be held for that purpose. The additional
sum or rate required to be raised by such additional tax levy shall be
expressed upon the ballot. If a majority of the votes cast upon such
proposition shall be in favor of authorizing the council to levy such
additional rate, then the council may levy the additional tax so authorized for
one fiscal year only.
(Amended by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68)
Sec. 12.   Budget contents - Transfer of funds.
   It shall be the duty of the council, upon the recommendation of the city
manager, to consider and, after a public hearing, adopt a budget for each
fiscal year. After the adoption of a budget, transfers of appropriations from
one department to another may be made only by a majority vote of the council.
This budget shall include the estimated receipts and expenditures of all public
funds, except those which are trust funds, from whatever source they are
derived. All expenditures made on behalf of the city, directly or through any
agency, except those required to be made by state law, must be made in
accordance with the authorization contained in the appropriation ordinance. The
form in which this budget is adopted shall determine the method to be followed
in all accounting by all representatives and administrative agents of the city.
The council shall set all salary and wage scales, determine the procedure for
the payment of all demands against the city, and the duties of the city's
several officers in respect thereto. Additional appropriations of receipts in
excess of the total appropriations made by the budget may be made by a two-
thirds vote of the council.
Sec. 13.   Council to establish utility rates.
   The council shall establish rates for all revenue producing utilities owned,
controlled, or operated by the city.
Sec. 14.   Ordaining clause.
   The ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the council shall be, "The
council of the city of Palo Alto does ordain as follows," and the ordaining
clause of all ordinances adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article
VI shall be, "The people of the city of Palo Alto do ordain as follows."
Sec. 15.   Franchises granted by electors - Exception, term.
   Except for any franchise or franchises which the city council may grant for
the provision of cable television services, no other franchise for any other
purpose shall be granted by the council, but may be granted by the electors by
ordinances proposed and adopted as provided in Section 2 of Article VI of this
charter, provided that the petition therefor shall be signed by qualified and
registered voters equal in number to at least twelve percentum of the number of
registered voters at the last preceding general municipal election; and
provided further, that no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than
twenty-five years.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 16.   Annual report.
   The council shall publish annually a financial report of the city which
shall be available to taxpayers.
Sec. 17.   Salary of council members - Council members barred from other city
office.
   No member of the council shall hold any other office or employment the
compensation for which is paid out of the moneys of this city. No member of the
council shall be elected or appointed to any city office for which compensation
is paid until one year after the termination of membership in the council,
either by resignation or expiration of such council member's term. Compensation
may be paid council members in amounts not to exceed those provided by general
law.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 18.   Administrative code - Contents.
   Within six months after the adoption of this amended charter, the council
shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing for a complete plan
of administrative organization of the city government, which will cover all
matters concerning the powers, duties, term of office, procedure of all the
officers, boards and commissions and employees of the city; provided however,
that the provisions of said code shall not be in conflict with any of the
provisions of this charter. This administrative code will cover all rules and
regulations relating to fiscal operations, personnel management, election
procedure, and other matters concerning the operation of the functions of the
city government.
Sec. 19.   Contract with state retirement system.
   The council is empowered to enter into a contract with the Board of
Administration of the California State Employees' Retirement System, making the
employees of the city members of said system, and for this purpose may levy a
tax sufficient to pay costs and expenses of the share which the city must
contribute to maintain employee participation. It is provided, however, that
the council may terminate this contract only upon authority granted by an
ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting on such
a proposition at an election at which such proposition to discontinue the
contract is presented.
Sec. 20.   Assignment of officers' duties.
   The council may, by ordinance, assign additional duties and powers to
officers, departments, commissions, and boards provided in this charter, or may
reassign functions from one office to another, or may combine in one office the
powers and duties of another office, provided that the offices of city manager
and auditor may not be combined and that an office to which the manager makes
the appointment shall not be combined with one to which the appointment is made
by the council.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 21.   Bonds - Deputies and assistants.
   The council may require any of the city officers and deputies to give
official bonds in such sums as it may deem proper, and the city shall pay all
premiums upon surety bonds when such bonds are given. It may provide for the
appointment of such deputies and assistants as may be required, and shall fix
the compensation of such officers, deputies, and assistants in the annual
appropriation ordinance. All officers shall perform such services as the
council may require.
Sec. 22.   Board of compensation referees - Cable television board - Other
boards advisory only.
   The council may appoint a board of compensation referees to act upon all
claims against the city arising under the workmen's compensation provisions of
the Labor Code of the State of California. The council may also appoint an
independent board or boards for cable television matters. All other boards,
commissions, and committees appointed by the council or by any officer of the
city under the provisions of this charter or under any ordinance adopted by the
council shall be advisory only and shall exercise no governmental or
administrative powers.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 23.   Continuation of government - Disaster.
   The council may by ordinance or resolution, provide for the preservation and
continuation of government in the event of disaster which renders unavailable a
majority of the council.
(Amended by Stats. 1961, Ch. 190, 6-7-61)
Article IV. Duties of Officers
Sec. 1.   Council appointed officers.
   The council shall appoint the city manager, clerk, attorney and auditor, who
shall serve at its pleasure.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, 2-19-65 and by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68
and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 2.   Qualifications of city manager.
   The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and
shall be chosen without regard to political consideration and solely with
reference to executive and administrative qualifications. The city manager
shall be a citizen of the United States, but need not be a resident of the
state of California or of the city at the time of appointment, but promptly
thereafter shall become and thereafter remain, during his or her incumbency, an
actual resident of the city. Members of the council shall not be eligible to
hold the position of city manager during their terms of office or for one year
after.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 3.   Appointment and removal of city manager.
   The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority
vote of the council, and may be removed by resolution at the pleasure of the
council, by a two-thirds vote thereof. Before being removed, the city manager
shall upon demand be given a written statement of the reasons for removal and
the right to be heard publicly thereon at a meeting of the council prior to the
final vote on the removal resolution, but pending and during such hearing the
council may suspend him or her from office. The action of the council in
suspending or removing the city manager shall be final and conclusive. Upon any
vacancy occurring in the office of the city manager subsequent to the first
appointment hereunder, the council shall, without delay, adopt a resolution of
its intention to appoint a city manager, which resolution shall be published
once in the official newspaper of the city. No appointment shall be made in
less than thirty days after such publications. This provision, however, shall
not affect the appointment of a city manager pro tem as herein provided.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 4.   Bond of city manager.
   The city manager shall, before taking office, file with the city clerk an
official bond, payable to the city, for the faithful performance of duty. The
amount of this bond shall be fixed by the council and shall be not less than
five thousand dollars, the premium for which shall be paid by the city.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 5.   Salary of city manager.
   The city manager shall be paid a salary commensurate with the duties and
responsibilities of the chief administrative officer of the city.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 6.   Duties of city manager.
   It shall be the duty of the city manager to:
   (a)   Devote his entire time to the discharge of the duties of the office.
   (b)   See that all ordinances are enforced.
   (c)   Appoint all officers, heads of departments and employees of the
departments under his or her control, and remove the same for cause, and have
general supervision and control over the same, subject to rules and regulations
established by the council for a merit system of appointments and promotions;
provided, however, that the appointment of all officers and heads of
departments shall be subject to the approval of the council. The city manager
may, with the approval of the council, act as head or assume the executive
position of any department of the city under his or her control for which he or
she is qualified by training and experience.
   (d)   Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the
council.
   (e)   Act as ex officio member of all boards and commissions.
   (f)   Keep the council advised on the needs of the city.
   (g)   Prepare and submit to the council an annual budget estimate for all
departments reporting to the city manager, together with the budget estimates
prepared by the heads of the several other departments, and such reports as the
council may require, including the annual reports of all departments of the
city.
   (h)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for work
the council may order; and to provide such plans and specifications in
sufficient number and in ample time to give full opportunity for all
contractors who desire to bid thereon to do so.
   (i)   To have general control of all public utilities owned or operated by
the city.
   (j)   Exercise general supervision over all privately owned utilities
operated within the city so far as the same are subject to municipal control.
   (k)   See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits,
and privileges, granted by the city, are fully observed, and to report to the
council any violation thereof.
   (l)   Have general supervision over all city property and equipment and its
use for the public or by city employees.
   (m)   Coordinate the work of personnel administration in the departments
under his or her control, subject to the rules and regulations of the council
for the establishment and operation of a merit system.
   (n)   From time to time, in order to facilitate the prompt, economical, and
efficient dispatch of city business, the city manager may organize the work of
the departments under his or her control, assign assistants, deputies, and
employees from any office or department of the city government under his or her
control to perform work or service in connection with any other offices or
department thereof, or to work in more than one of said offices or departments.
   (o)   Examine, or cause to be examined, without notice, the official conduct
of any officer, assistant, deputy, or employee in any of the departments of the
city government, except of the council or the officers appointed by it.
   (p)   Coordinate the purchase for all departments of the city. No purchase
shall be made without the approval of the city manager.
   (q)   Appoint committees deemed desirable to advise and assist him or her,
provided the members of such committees shall serve without compensation.
   (r)   Perform such other duties as may be required by this charter or as the
council may require.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983 and by amendment filed with the Secretary
of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 7.   City manager right of discussion - No vote.
   The city manager and such other officers of the city as may be designated by
vote of the council, shall be entitled to seats with the council, but shall
have no vote therein. The city manager shall have the right to take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the council.
Sec. 8.   Assistant city manager.
   The council may provide for the appointment of an assistant city manager. In
such case he or she shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of
the council and shall be under the supervision and direction of the city
manager.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 9.   City manager pro tem.
   In the absence or temporary disability of the city manager and the assistant
city manager, if one is appointed, the council shall appoint a city manager pro
tem who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the city manager
during such absence or disability; provided, however, that a city manager pro
tem shall have no authority to appoint or remove any city officer or employee
except with the two-thirds vote of the council, or as provided in the
administrative code.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 10.   Coercion by council members - Campaign funds.
   No member of the council shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, by
suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the city manager in the
making of any appointment or removal, or in the purchase of supplies, or
attempt to exact any promise relative to any appointment from any candidate for
city manager, or discuss, directly or indirectly, with any such candidate, the
matter of appointments to any city office or employment. Any violation of the
foregoing provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall
work a forfeiture of the office of the offending member of the council, who may
be removed therefrom by the council or by any court of competent jurisdiction.
Neither the city manager nor any person in the employ of the city shall take
part in securing or shall contribute any money toward the nomination or
election of any candidate for a municipal office.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 11.   Manager's kin disqualified.
   No person related to the city manager by consanguinity or affinity within
the third degree shall hold any appointive office or employment with the city.
Sec. 12.   Duties of appointive officers.
   The duties of the city clerk and attorney shall be those normally exercised
by such officers as provided in this charter and in the administrative code.
   It shall be the duty of the city auditor to ensure that the city departments
and officers responsible for accounting and financial management activities
comply with statutory requirements and accounting standards. It shall be the
duty of the auditor to conduct internal audits of all the fiscal transactions
of the city including, but not limited to, the examination and analysis of
fiscal procedures and the examination, checking, and verification of accounts
and expenditures; and the city auditor shall provide other analyses of
financial and operating data as directed by the city council. The city auditor
shall conduct internal audits in accordance with a schedule approved by the
city council and may conduct unscheduled audits from time to time. The results
of these audits shall be reported in writing to the city council and the city
manager. In addition, the auditor shall have such other duties as the council
may by ordinance direct.
(Amended by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 13.   Audits.
   In addition to the audits conducted by the city auditor, the city council
shall engage an independent certified public accounting firm to conduct an
annual external audit and report the results of this audit in writing to the
city council. The city auditor shall coordinate the annual external audit.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Article V. Compulsory Arbitration for Fire and Police Department Employee
Disputes
(This Article repealed by Special Election Measure D, passed by the electorate
November 8, 2011)
Article VI. The Recall, Initiative and Referendum
Sec. 1.   Recall.
   Proceedings may be commenced for recall of any council member by the
service, filing and publication of a notice of intention to circulate a recall
petition. Proceedings may not be commenced unless, at the time of commencement,
such council member has held office for at least six months and no recall
petition has been filed against such council member within the preceding six
months.
   The petition demanding the recall of the council member sought to be
recalled, signed by registered voters equal in number to at least twelve
percentum of the number of registered voters at the last general municipal
election, shall be filed with the clerk. One election is sufficient for the
recall of one or more council members, but a separate petition is necessary to
propose the recall of each council member.
   No signature may be affixed to the petition until the proponents have
served, filed and published a notice of intention to circulate a recall
petition, containing the name of the council member sought to be recalled, a
statement in not more than five hundred words of the grounds on which the
recall is sought, and the name and address of at least one proponent. The
notice of intention shall be served, personally or by certified mail, on the
council member sought to be recalled, and a copy thereof with a certificate of
the time and manner of service shall be filed with the clerk. A separate notice
of intention shall be filed for each council member sought to be recalled.
   Within seven days after the filing of the notice of intention, the council
member sought to be recalled may file with the clerk an answer in not more than
five hundred words to the statement of the proponents and, if an answer is
filed, shall serve a copy thereof, personally or by certified mail, on one of
the proponents named in the notice of intention. The statement and answer are
intended solely for the information of the voters and no insufficiency in the
form or substance thereof shall affect the validity of the election or
proceedings. The notice, statement and answer, if any, shall then be published
in a newspaper of general circulation by the city clerk.
   No signature may be affixed to a recall petition until the county registrar
of voters has received two blank copies of the petition and has advised the
proponents in writing that the form and wording are in order.
   Seven days after the publication of the notice, statement and answer, if
any, by the city clerk and provided all the requirements of this section re
Notice of Intention, answers, and form of petition have been met, the recall
petition may be circulated and signed. The petition shall bear a copy of the
notice of intention, statement and answer, if any. If the council member has
not answered, the petition shall so state. Signatures shall be secured and the
petition filed within ninety days from the filing of the notice of intention.
If such petition is not filed within the time permitted by this section, the
same shall be void for all purposes.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. The number of signatures to each
section shall be at the pleasure of the person soliciting signatures to the
same. Any qualified voter of the municipality shall be competent to solicit
said signatures. Unless and until it be proven otherwise by official
investigation, it shall be presumed that the petition presented contains the
signatures of the requisite number of qualified voters. Each signer of said
petition shall at the time of signing the petition include his printed name and
his place of residence, giving street and number, and if no street or number
exists, then a designation of his place of residence which will enable the
location to be readily ascertained and the name of the city. A place at least
one-inch wide shall be left blank after each name for the use of the clerk in
verifying the petition.
   Each section of the petition shall have attached to it a declaration signed
by the circulator of that section of the petition, setting forth all of the
following:
   (a)   The printed name of the circulator.
   (b)   The residence address of the circulator, giving street and number, or
if no street or number exists, adequate designation of residence so that the
location may be readily ascertained.
   (c)   That the circulator circulated that section and saw the appended
signatures being written.
   (d)   That according to the best information and belief of the circulator,
each signature is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to
be.
   (e)   That the circulator is a registered voter of the electoral
jurisdiction of the officer sought to be recalled.
   (f)   The dates between which all the signatures to the petition were
obtained.
   (g)   The circulator shall certify to the content of the declaration as to
its truth and correctness, under penalty of perjury, with the signature of his
name at length, including given name, middle name or initial, or initial and
middle name. The circulator shall date the declaration immediately following
his signature.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination. If, by the said certificate, the petition is
shown to be insufficient, it may be amended by additional signatures within ten
days from the date of said certificate. The clerk shall, within fifteen
business days after such amendment, make like examination of the amended
petition, and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it
shall be returned to the person filing the same, without prejudice, however, to
the filing of a new petition to the same effect.
   If the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the clerk shall submit the
same to the council without delay, and the council shall thereupon order and
fix a date for holding the said election within the time set by the general
laws of the state of California. Candidates for this election shall file with
the city clerk within the nomination period set by the general laws of the
state of California.
   At least ten days prior to the recall election, the clerk shall mail to each
voter a sample ballot and a separate printed copy of the statement of the
proponents and of the answer, if any, of the council member sought to be
recalled. If the recall of more than one council member is sought, the
statement and answer for each shall be printed together and shall be clearly
distinguished from those of any other council member.
   There shall be printed on the recall ballot, as to each council member whose
recall is to be voted on, the question: "Shall (name of person) be recalled
from the office of council member?" followed by the words "yes" and "no." If a
majority of those voting on any question voted in favor of the removal of an
incumbent, such incumbent shall be deemed removed from office upon the
qualification of the successor.
   On the recall ballot, under each question, there shall be printed the names
of those persons who have been nominated in the manner provided herein as
candidates to succeed the incumbent if such incumbent is recalled. No vote cast
shall be counted for any candidate for the office unless the voter also voted
on the question of the recall of the person sought to be recalled from that
office. The name of the person against whom the petition is filed shall not
appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. If the vote recalls the
council member, the candidate who has received the highest number of votes for
the office shall be declared elected for the unexpired term of the former
incumbent. If the person who received the highest number of votes fails to
qualify within ten days after receiving the certificate of election the office
shall become vacant. Said election shall be conducted, returned, and the
results thereof declared, in all respects as are all other municipal elections;
provided, that if there be any conflict of provisions this charter shall
control.
Sec. 2.   Initiative.
   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed
by qualified and registered electors of the city equal in number to the
percentage hereinafter required. The petition shall set forth a copy of the
proposed ordinance.
   An initiative petition, in order to be valid, must meet the following
requirements:
   (a)   A notice of intention to circulate an initiative petition must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition and shall be substantially in the
following form:
   Notice of Intent to Circulate Initiative Petition
   Notice is hereby given of the intention of the persons whose names appear
hereon to circulate an initiative petition within the city of Palo Alto for the
purpose of ________. A statement of the reasons of the proposed action as
contemplated in said petition is as follows:
   (b)   A copy of the notice of intention, together with an affidavit of
publication, shall be filed with the clerk prior to the affixing of any
signature to any petition.
   (c)   Immediately after the publication and filing of the notice of
intention to circulate, the initiative petition may be circulated and filed.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. Each section of the petition shall
contain a copy of the notice of intention to circulate and a copy of the
proposed ordinance. The number of signatures to each section shall be at the
pleasure of the person soliciting signatures to the same. Any qualified voter
of the municipality shall be competent to solicit said signatures. Unless and
until it be proven otherwise by official investigation, it shall be presumed
that the petition presented contains the signatures of the requisite number of
qualified voters.
   Each signer of said petition shall at the time of signing the petition
include his printed name and place of residence, giving street and number, and
if no street or number exists, then a designation of his place of residence
which will enable the location to be readily ascertained and the name of the
city. A place of at least one-inch wide shall be left blank after each name for
the use of the clerk in verifying the petition.
   In addition to the requirements specified above, each section shall have
attached thereto the affidavit of the person soliciting the signatures stating:
   (1)   The name and address of the circulator and a statement that he or she
is a qualified registered voter.
   (2)   That all the signatures affixed to the section were made in his or her
presence.
   (3)   That to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, each signature is
the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
   (4)   The dates between which all signatures were obtained.
   (5)   The signature of the circulator. No other affidavit thereto shall be
required.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination.
   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by qualified
and registered electors equal in number of six percentum of the number of
registered voters at the last general municipal election the council must
either pass such ordinance without alteration or submit the same to the
electorate at the next general municipal election that shall occur at any time
not less than eighty-eight days from the date of the clerk's certificate of
sufficiency. But if such petition is signed by qualified and registered
electors equal in number to twelve percentum of said number of registered
voters at the last general municipal election and contains a request that such
ordinance be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election, then the
council must either pass the ordinance without alteration or submit the same to
the electorate at a special election to be called within the period provided by
the general laws of the state of California.
   If the clerk's certification shows that the petition is insufficient by
reason of the failure to obtain sufficient valid signatures thereon, a
supplemental petition, in form a duplicate of the original petition, bearing
new additional signatures may be filed within ten days of the mailing of the
certificate of insufficiency to the proponents of the initiative. Supplemental
petitions shall be processed by the clerk in the same manner as set forth
herein with respect to original petitions.
   The ballots used when voting upon such proposed ordinance shall contain the
words "For the Ordinance," and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of
the proposed ordinance). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall become a
valid and binding ordinance of the city. The council may at such election
submit any amendment thereto that it may deem proper, and the ballots used at
such election shall contain the words "For the Amendment," or "Against the
Amendment," or ordinance (naming the ordinance), and also stating the nature of
the proposed amendment. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed amendment shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon
be deemed amended in accordance therewith. The council may also propose and
submit any ordinance to the electors, and such ordinance, upon receiving a
majority of the votes of the electors voting thereon, shall be deemed to have
been adopted and shall be a valid and binding ordinance of the city. Such
ordinances shall be considered as adopted upon the date the council conducts
the official canvass of the election and shall go into effect ten days after
that date. Any ordinance adopted by the electors under the provisions of this
section cannot be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the people obtained
in the manner hereinabove stated, unless such ordinance shall otherwise
provide.
   Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this section: provided, that there shall not
be held under this section of the charter more than one special election in any
period of twelve months.
Sec. 3.   Referendum.
   Any ordinance, other than such as may be required to be passed at a
particular time or for the purpose of complying with a charter or general law,
and excepting such ordinances or measures for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, or safety, shall be subject to a referendum as herein
provided. Provided further that the petition for such referendum be filed
within thirty days from the final passage of such ordinance, and the same shall
not be effective during said period during which the same is subject to
referendum.
   The council may, of its own motion, submit any ordinance or question of
policy to a referendum.
   A referendum petition asking that a particular ordinance named therein be
submitted to a vote of the electorate, in order to be valid, must meet the
following requirements:
   (a)   A notice of intention to circulate a referendum petition must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition and shall be substantially in the
following form:
   Notice of Intent to Circulate Referendum Petition
   Notice is hereby given of the intention of the persons whose names appear
hereon to circulate a referendum petition within the city of Palo Alto for the
purpose of ________. A statement of the reasons of the proposed action as
contemplated in said petition is as follows:
   (b)   The notice of intention shall be filed with the clerk prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition.
   (c)   Immediately after the publication and filing of the notice of
intention to circulate the referendum petition may be circulated and filed. The
petition shall bear a copy of the notice of intention to circulate. Signatures
shall be secured and the petition filed within thirty days of the date of the
adoption or passage of the ordinance filed with the clerk. If such petition is
not filed within the time required by this section, the same shall be void for
all purposes.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. Each section shall contain the
number and title of the ordinance proposed to be referended and a statement
that the purpose of the petition is to referend such ordinance. The number of
signatures to each section shall be at the pleasure of the person soliciting
signatures to the same. Any qualified voter of the municipality shall be
competent to solicit said signatures. Each signer of said petition shall at the
time of signing the petition include his printed name and place of residence,
giving street and number, and if no street or number exists, then a designation
of his place of residence which will enable the location to be readily
ascertained and the name of the city. A place of at least one-inch wide shall
be left blank after each name for the use of the clerk in verifying the
petition.
   Each section shall have attached thereto the affidavit of the person
soliciting signatures to the same stating:
   (1)   The name and address of the circulator and a statement that he or she
is a registered voter of Palo Alto.
   (2)   That all the signatures affixed to the section were made in his or her
presence.
   (3)   That to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, each signature is
the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
   (4)   The dates between which all signatures were obtained.
   (5)   The signature of the circulator. No other affidavit thereto shall be
required.
   Unless and until it be proven otherwise by official investigation, it shall
be presumed that the petition presented contains the signatures of the
requisite number of qualified voters.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination. If the clerk's certification shows that the
petition is insufficient by reason of the failure to obtain sufficient valid
signatures thereon, a supplemental petition, in form a duplicate of the
original petition, bearing new additional signatures may be filed within ten
days of the mailing of the certificate of insufficiency to the proponents of
the referendum. Supplemental petitions shall be processed by the clerk in the
same manner as set forth herein with respect to original petitions. If the
petition is signed by qualified and registered electors equal in number to six
percentum of the number of registered voters at the last general municipal
election and the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the clerk shall
submit the same to the council without delay and it shall be the duty of the
council to reconsider such ordinance. If the council fails to entirely repeal
such ordinance, it shall be the duty of the council to submit the question of
the approval or rejection of such ordinance to the electors at the next general
municipal election or a special election that shall be held not less than
eighty-eight days from the date of the clerk's certificate of sufficiency and,
until such election is held and the ordinance approved by the electors, such
ordinance shall be suspended and inoperative.
   The ballots used when voting upon such ordinance shall contain the words
"For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of the
proposed ordinance). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall become a
valid and binding ordinance on the city.
   If the ordinance voted upon is approved, it shall have the same force and
effect of any other ordinance adopted by council and may be amended at any time
as though no election were held. If the ordinance voted upon is disapproved,
the council may not adopt a substantially similar ordinance for a period of at
least one year from the date of election.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by Stats. 1982, Ch. 30, 12-10-82)
Article VII. Miscellaneous
Sec. 1.   Interest of officers in contracts.
   No officer of the city shall be interested in any contract entered into by
the city, and the general laws of the state forbidding city officials to be so
interested are hereby made a part of this charter.
Sec. 2.   Public utilities revenue.
   The revenue of each public utility shall be kept in a separate fund from all
other receipts and shall be used for the purposes and in the order as follows:
   (a)   For the payment of the operating and maintenance expenses of such
utility, including the necessary contribution to retirement of its employees.
   (b)   For the payment of interest on the bonded debt incurred for the
construction or acquisition of such utility.
   (c)   For the payment of the principal of said debt, as it may become due.
   (d)   For capital expenditures of such utility.
   (e)   For the annual payment into a reserve fund for contingencies, of an
amount not to exceed ten percent of the expenditure for capital outlay for the
year, exclusive of bond fund expenditures. The total accumulated in this
reserve for contingencies shall at no time exceed five percent of the book
value of the utility's capital in service. This reserve fund shall be available
for use by the utility, only for replacements or emergency repairs and after
special appropriation by the council.
   (f)   The remainder shall be paid into the general fund by quarterly
allotments.
Sec. 3.   Candidates' designation.
   No ballot used at any municipal election shall contain any reference to a
political party, and no designation or symbol shall be placed in connection
with the name of any candidate. The order of listing of candidates' names on
the ballot shall be determined by lot.
(Amended by Stats. 1967, Ch. 103, ACR No. 106 and by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-
26-69 and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 4.   No franchise without grant.
   No person, firm or corporation shall ever exercise any franchise, license,
permit, easement, privilege or other use, except in so far as he or it may be
entitled to do so by direct authority of the Constitution of the State of
California, or of the Constitution or laws of the United States, in, upon,
over, under or along any street, highway or other public place in the city
unless he or it shall have first obtained a grant therefor in accordance with
the provisions of this charter.
Sec. 5.   Effective date of tax liens.
(Repealed by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68)
Sec. 6.   Contracts - Lowest responsible bidder.
   In the erection, improvement or repair of all public buildings and works,
and in all street and sewer work, the cost of which is to be paid from funds
realized by bonded indebtedness of the city or by assessment against any
particular property in the city, the work shall be let to the lowest
responsible bidder; provided, however, the council may reject any and all bids
if deemed excessive, and readvertise for bids, or provide for the work to be
done by the city.
   In case no bid is received, the council may likewise provide for the work to
be done by the city.
   When the estimate of the cost of said work by the city engineer shows the
said work can be done for an equal or less cost than that of the lowest bid,
then any of the work herein mentioned may be done by the city, and the city
shall be deemed the contractor, with the right to enforce all liens, and with
the same powers, rights, duties, and obligations as are made and provided by
the laws of the state for contractors who have entered into contracts to do
such work as the lowest responsible bidder.
   The council shall have power to adopt ordinances for the purpose of carrying
out these provisions, and such ordinances shall be supplemental to the existing
laws of the state, and shall have the same force and effect.
Sec. 7.   Lease of city land.
   The council may lease or sub-lease real property owned or leased by the city
for a period not to exceed fifty years. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
ratify, validate or extend the term of any lease outstanding on the effective
date of this section.
(Amended by Stats. 1961, Ch. 190, 6-7-61)
Sec. 8.   Effect of charter amendments - Officers.
   All officers, deputies, assistants, and employees in office or employment
when this charter or its amendments take effect, shall continue to hold and
exercise their respective offices or employment, under the terms of this
charter, until removed or until the appointment and qualification of their
successors.
Sec. 9.   Charter amendment - Vested rights - Contracts - Etc.
   All vested rights of the city shall continue and shall not in any manner be
affected by the amendment of this charter, unless specifically so provided, nor
shall any right, liability, pending suit or prosecution, either in behalf of or
against the city, be affected by the amendment of this charter, unless
otherwise herein expressly provided. All contracts entered into by the city
prior to the taking effect of the amendments to this charter shall be continued
and perfected thereunder. Public improvements for which legislative steps shall
have been taken under laws in force at the time these amendments take effect,
may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such laws.
Sec. 10.   Effect of charter amendments - Pension - Retirement.
   The pension and retirement rights and privileges of officers and employees
of the city at the time this charter is amended, shall not be adversely
affected by its provisions unless specifically provided herein.
Sec. 11.   Severability provision.
   If any section or part of a section of this charter proves to be invalid, it
shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity of any other section or
part of a section, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of
a section is dependent for its operation upon this section or part of a section
so held invalid.
Article VIII. 1 Parks 2
(This Article amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
   All lands owned or controlled by the city which are or will be used for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes shall be dedicated for
such purposes by ordinance. 3
   No land heretofore or hereafter dedicated for such purposes shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of, nor shall its use be abandoned or discontinued except
pursuant to majority vote of the electorate. Any election and related
procedures under Article VIII shall conform to the provisions set forth in
general law as it existed January 1,1965, except that the council may call such
election by majority vote.
   No substantial building, construction, reconstruction or development upon or
with respect to any lands so dedicated shall be made except pursuant to
ordinance subject to referendum.
1   Formerly Article VIII, Alcoholic Liquors, repealed by Stats. 1965 (ARC No.
20).
2   Disposal of park lands - See Appendix A.
3   See Ordinances 2252, 2269, 2284, 2300, 2351, 2467.
Article VIII-A. Board of Education
(This Article added by Stats. 1951, Ch. 40, 3-14-51)
Sec. 1.   Members - Number - Residency - Compensation.
   The board of education of the Palo Alto Unified School District shall
consist of five members who are residents of the territory of the unified
school district, or any additions thereto. They shall serve without
compensation.
Sec. 2.   Effect of amendment - Term.
   (a)   The members of the board of education holding office when this
amendment takes effect shall continue in office until their respective terms of
office shall expire and until their successors are elected and qualified.
   (b)   Time of Election. The election and recall of members of the board of
education shall be held at the times and in the manner provided by the
Education Code of the State of California.
(Amended by amendment filed with the city clerk July 17,1978)
   (c)   Term of Office. The term of office of the members of the board of
education, shall be four years from and after the first day of the month
succeeding their election and until their successors are elected and qualified.
The term of office of the members of the board of education which commenced
July 1, 1975, shall expire in 1979. The term of office of the member of the
board of education which commenced April 1, 1977, shall expire in 1981. The
term of office of the member of the board of education which commenced April 1,
1978, shall expire in 1983.
(Amended by amendments filed with the Secretary of State, July 1, 1976; July
17, 1978; and May 30, 1979)
   (d)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the board of education shall be filled by
appointment by the board and such appointee shall hold office until the next
regular election of members of the board and until their successors are elected
and qualified. At said next regular election succeeding any vacancy, a member
shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term and until his successor is
elected and qualified.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
Sec. 3.   Powers and duties.
   The powers and duties of the board of education shall be those prescribed by
the Constitution, Education Code, and general laws of the state of California,
as they may now exist or may hereafter be amended.
Sec. 4.   Superintendent of schools - Appointment.
   The board of education shall appoint a superintendent of schools who shall
be the chief executive officer of the board and shall enforce all rules and
regulations of the board and the Education Code of the state. The
superintendent shall also act as ex officio secretary and clerk of the board.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Article IX. Amendments
Sec. 1.   Compliance with Constitution.
   This charter may be amended on compliance with the provisions of the
Constitution of the State of California.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
Sec. 2.   Submission to electorate - Canvass.
   The council must make all necessary provisions for submitting the proposed
amendments to the electors, and shall canvass the votes in the same manner as
in other elections.
Sec. 3.   Wording of ballots.
   The ballots used at such elections shall contain the words "For the
Amendment" and "Against the Amendment" (stating the nature of the proposed
amendment).
Article X. Effective Date of Amended Charter
   This amended charter shall take effect on the first day of July, 1950, at
twelve o'clock noon. All ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in force at
the time of the approval of this amended charter by the legislature are hereby
continued in full force and effect until the same shall be amended or repealed,
and if inconsistent with this amended charter, until the first day of July,
1950, at twelve o'clock noon. The members of the council in office at the time
of the approval of this amended charter by the legislature shall continue to
hold office and discharge their duties until the expiration of their terms of
office and the election and qualification of their successors.
APPENDIX A
to the
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF PALO ALTO
(See Section 3, Article VIII, Parks, Added by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 161).
   EXCERPT FROM CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE ART. 2, CH. 9, PART 2, DIV. 3, TITLE
4,
   COMMENCING AT SECTION 38440, AS SAID ARTICLE EXISTED ON JANUARY 1, 1965.
   Article 2. Parks Dedicated by City
   Sec. 38440.   Abandonment and disposal - Authority.
   A city may discontinue and abandon the use as a public park of any land
owned in fee by it and dedicated or placed in such use by such city, and
thereafter dispose of the land, pursuant to this article.
   Sec. 38441.   Exchanges - Authority - Conditions.
   Without a special election, the legislative body may convey a minor portion
of such a park in exchange for an equal or greater area or value of privately
owned land contiguous to the park after:
   (a)   Notice and a public hearing pursuant to this article.
   (b)   Determination that the exchange is in the public interest.
   (c)   Adoption of a resolution of discontinuance.
   Sec. 38442.   Prohibited discontinuances.
   Except as provided in Section 38441, this article shall not be construed to
authorize:
   (a)   A discontinuance and abandonment, or change in the use, of such lands
which will cause the reversion of the lands to private ownership or a
forfeiture of the city's ownership in fee.
   (b)   The discontinuance of the use of park lands acquired by funds obtained
from a local assessment based on benefits.
   Sec. 38443.   Initiation of proceedings - Resolution.
   Proceedings are initiated when the legislative body adopts a resolution
declaring that public interest or convenience requires the discontinuance of
the use of such land as a public park, and that the legislative body intends to
call a special election to submit the question of discontinuance to the city
electors.
   Sec. 38444.   Resolution - Contents.
   The resolution shall:
   (a)   Contain an accurate description of the lands.
   (b)   State the common name of the park.
   (c)   State the disposition which the legislative body proposes to make of
the park.
   (d)   Fix a time, not less than thirty nor more than sixty days after
adoption of the resolution, and a place, at which the public or persons
particularly interested may protest.
   Sec. 38445.   Resolution - Publication.
   The city clerk shall cause the resolution to be published twice in a daily
newspaper published and circulated in the city, or if there is none, twice in a
weekly or semiweekly newspaper so published and circulated. If there are no
such newspapers, the resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper
published in the county. Publication shall be completed at least twenty days
before the time set for the hearing.
   Sec. 38446.   Notices of resolution - Posting.
   The park superintendent or another person designated by the legislative body
shall cause at least three notices of the adoption of the resolution to be
posted conspicuously not more than three hundred feet apart along the exterior
boundaries of the area proposed to be discontinued and abandoned as a public
park. Posting shall be completed at least twenty days before the time set for
the hearing. Failure to post the notices does not invalidate the proceedings or
prevent the legislative body from acquiring jurisdiction to proceed with the
discontinuance and abandonment.
   Sec. 38447.   Notices of resolution - Heading and contents.
   The posted notices shall be headed: "Notice of proposed discontinuance of
public park land" in legible characters, state the date of adoption of the
resolution, and recite the facts contained in the resolution.
   Sec. 38448.   Protests.
   At any time before the hour set for the hearing, any person or persons
interested may protest in writing against the proposed abandonment and
discontinuance, or to the extent thereof. The protest shall be delivered to the
clerk of the legislative body.
   Sec. 38449.   Protests - Hearing.
   At the time set for the hearing or to which it is postponed, the legislative
body shall hear and pass upon all such protests.
   Sec. 38450.   Protests - Rulings - Call of special election.
   Protests are sustained unless overruled by two-thirds vote of the
legislative body. The legislative body may sustain protests as to one portion,
and overrule them as to another portion of park land. If protests are
overruled, the legislative body may adopt an ordinance calling, and fixing date
of a special election to submit to the city electors the question of
discontinuance and abandonment of the use of park land on which protests were
overruled.
   Sec. 38451.   Special election - Affirmative vote - Ordinance of
discontinuance.
   If a majority of the electors voting on the proposition are in favor of it,
the legislative body shall adopt an ordinance declaring that use of the land
described in the ordinance calling the election for park purposes is
discontinued and abandoned.
   Sec. 38452.   Special election - Negative vote - Continuance of park.
   If less than a majority of such electors vote for it, the legislative body
shall not initiate proceedings for discontinuance of the use of such land for
park purposes for one year after the election.
   Note: Sections 38453 through 38459 were repealed by the state legislature in
1951.
   Sec. 38460.   Effect of ordinance - Authority to dispose of property.
   When the ordinance becomes effective, the land described in it is deemed
held by the city in fee. The city may sell or otherwise dispose of the property
in the same manner as it may dispose of other city property no longer required
for municipal purposes.
   Sec. 38461.   Proceeds of sale - Bond fund - General fund.
   If the land was acquired by money derived from bonds authorized for park
purpose, and the land sold, the reasonable market value of the land at the time
of adoption of the ordinance shall be transferred to the bond fund from such
other municipal fund as the legislative body determines. If the land was not
acquired from bond funds and the land is sold, the proceeds from such sale
shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
   Sec. 38462.   Proceeds of sale - Use after deposit in bond fund.
   Except as permitted by general laws allowing diversions of bond funds, money
so transferred shall be devoted only to the purposes for which the bonds were
authorized.
