CITY CHARTER
Sec. 1. Name Of City; Perpetual Succession.
The municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City Of Porterville"
shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate, as at present, in fact
and in law, by the name of the "City Of Porterville," and by such name shall
have perpetual succession.
Sec. 1.1. City Motto.
"In God We Trust" shall be designated as the official motto of the city of
Porterville. (6-24-2008)
Sec. 2. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the city of Porterville shall continue as now established
until changed in some manner authorized by law.
Sec. 3. Rights And Liabilities Of Cities; Prior Contracts, Liabilities, Etc.,
Continued In Effect.
The city of Porterville shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold,
and enjoy, all property, rights of property, and rights of action of every
nature and description, now pertaining to said municipality, and is hereby
declared to be the successor of the same. No right, liability, pending suit or
prosecution on behalf of, or against, the city shall be affected by the
adoption of this charter. All contracts entered into by the city prior to the
taking effect of this charter shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 4. General Powers Of City; Official Seal.
The city of Porterville, by and through its council and other officials, shall
have and may exercise all powers necessary or appropriate to a municipal
corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, which are not
prohibited by the constitution, and which it would be competent for this
charter to set forth particularly or specifically; and the specifications
herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be exclusive or any
limitation upon this general grant of power. General powers of the city
include, but are not limited to, the powers necessary or appropriate to promote
the health, welfare and education of its inhabitants. The city shall have and
use a common seal and the official seal hereinbefore adopted and now in use by
said city shall continue to be the official seal of said city. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 4.1. Intergovernmental Powers.
The city may exercise and perform any of its functions and may participate in
the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by agreement or otherwise,
with any one or more states or any agency of California, or any governmental
jurisdiction or nonprofit corporation thereof, or the United States or any of
its agencies or instrumentalities. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 4.2. Liberal Interpretation.
The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor
of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall
not be construed as limiting in any way any of the powers granted by this
charter. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 5. When Elections To Be Held; Special Elections; Procedure For Elections
For Local Improvements Or Levies Of Assessment Or Bonded Indebtedness.
General municipal elections shall be held in said city at the same time as the
general election for federal offices in the state of California under and
pursuant to the general laws of the state of California governing elections in
charter cities, so far as the same may be applicable, and except as herein
otherwise provided. All other municipal elections that may be held by authority
of this charter or of general law shall be known as special municipal
elections, and shall be held, substantially as in this charter provided for
general municipal elections; providing, however, that special elections to
authorize any municipal or local public improvement, or the levy of assessment
therefor, or to create a municipal bonded indebtedness, shall be held in
conformity with any general law of the state relative thereto under which any
such proceeding is instituted by the council, in case such general law provides
for the procedure and manner of holding elections thereunder. (4-6-1971; 4-5-
1977; 3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 6. Initiative, Referendum And Recall.
Ordinances may be initiated, or the referendum exercised on ordinances passed
by the council, under and in accordance with the constitution and general laws
of the state. Any elective officer may be recalled from office under and
pursuant to the provisions of the constitution and general laws, provided that
a special election shall be held at the same time as the recall election, in
accordance with the constitution and general laws of the state, for the purpose
of electing officers to fill the place or places of the officers sought to be
recalled. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 7. Elective Officers To Be Residents.
In order to be eligible to hold any elective office in the city of Porterville,
a person must be a resident and elector therein, and shall have resided in said
city for at least thirty days next preceding the filing of their nominating
papers, or equivalent declaration or candidacy, and be an elector at the time
of said filing. (4-6-1971; 4-5-1977; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 8. Elective Officers.
The elective officers of the city of Porterville shall be five councilmen, who
shall be elected from the city at large at a general municipal election
therein.
Sec. 9. Legislative Body; Composition; Election; Term; Compensation;
Ineligibility For Other City Office; President Of Council; Vice-President;
Installation Of Newly Elected Officers; Powers To Be Exercised By Council.
The legislative body of the city shall consist of five persons elected at
large, which body shall be known as the council.
The members of the council shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city
at a general municipal election to be held in the said city at the same time as
the general election for federal offices for the state of California. They
shall hold office for the period of four (4) years from and after the Monday
next succeeding the day of their election and until their successors are
elected, and qualified; provided the respective terms of any council member
presently serving or elected at the time of the adoption of this amendment
shall be extended one additional year to the even-numbered year following the
expiration of their respective terms. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The members of the council shall each receive the sum of twenty dollars
($20.00) for each council meeting actually attended; the mayor shall receive
the sum of twenty- five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting of the council
actually attended, provided, however, that the members of the council shall not
receive compensation for more than seven meetings in any one calendar month. In
addition, the council shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred for
authorized city business. (4-6-1971)
The members of the council shall not be eligible to any other office or
employment with the city.
The council shall reorganize at its next meeting following each municipal
election and shall choose one of their number to serve as president of the
council to be known as mayor. At this time the council shall also choose one of
their number to serve as vice-president, and he/she shall act as mayor pro
tempore in case of the absence, sickness or other disability of the mayor. The
mayor and mayor pro tempore shall serve a two year term, but either may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of the council. If the council removes
the mayor prior to the expiration of his/her term pursuant to this provision,
the council shall choose one of their number to serve as mayor until the next
organizational meeting. (3-4-2003)
The council shall meet at its usual meeting place on the first Monday after any
municipal election, duly canvass the returns and declare the result thereof,
and install the newly elected officers, if any.
All powers granted to and vested in the city of Porterville by law or by the
provisions of this charter, shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be
exercised by the council to be designated the "Council Of The City Of
Porterville." The council shall be the governing body of the city and subject
to the express limitations of this charter shall be vested with all the powers
necessary or convenient for a complete and adequate system of municipal
government, consistent with the constitution of the state. (4-6-1937)
Amendment note - The third paragraph of § 9 was amended April 6, 1971. Formerly
said section allowed each council member the sum of $5.00 for each meeting
actually attended, for not more than two meetings in any one month.
Sec. 9.1. Public Participation.
The council shall continue to encourage the organization of and communication
with representative neighborhood groups throughout the city to encourage
citizen participation, to seek advice and input and to provide information to
the public relative to city matters and affairs. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 10. Time And Place Of Council Meetings; Meetings To Be Open To Public;
Council To Adopt Rules For Conduct Of Its Own Proceedings.
The council shall provide by ordinance for the time and place of holding its
meetings. Special meetings shall be called in accordance with the provisions of
general law. There shall be at least one (1) regular meeting in each month. Any
regular meeting may be adjourned to a date and hour certain, and such adjourned
meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. (4-6-1971)
Except for special meetings with the legislative bodies of other political
subdivisions, or informational meetings held within a community in accordance
with the Brown act where no action is to be taken, all meetings of the council
shall be held at or on publicly-owned facilities, unless by reason of fire,
flood, or other disaster, or lack of seating capacity, the public-owned
facilities cannot be used for that purpose, and all meetings shall be open to
the public. The council shall adopt rules for conducting its proceedings and
may punish its members or other persons present at any meeting for disorderly
conduct. (4-2-1963; 3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 10 was amended April 6, 1971, by
changing the manner of calling special meetings. Formerly the council provided
by ordinance "the manner in which its special meetings may be called." The
second paragraph of § 10 was amended March 4, 2003 to allow meeting outside
city hall.
Sec. 11. Quorum; Compelling Attendance At Meetings.
A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and postpone the
consideration of or action upon, pending business in like manner. Attendance at
meetings of absent members of the council may be compelled in such manner and
under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Sec. 12. How Council Acts On Legislative Matters; Resolutions; Records Of
Votes; Requirement That All Members Vote; How Ordinances Headed; Ordaining
Clause; Ordaining Clause Of Ordinances Passed By Initiative; When Ordinances To
Be Passed; Publication; Effective Date Of Ordinances; Certain Matters Required
To Be Passed By Ordinance; Repeal Of Ordinances; Revision Of Ordinances;
Ordinances To Be Signed By Mayor And Attested By Clerk.
The council shall act in legislative matters by ordinance or resolution only.
Other action of the council, unless herein otherwise provided, may be taken by
resolution, motion, or order.
The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and
resolutions and entered upon the record of the proceedings of the council. Upon
the request of any member of the council, the ayes and noes shall be taken and
recorded upon any vote. All members present at any meeting must vote; provided
that no such member of the council shall cast a vote when to do so would be
contrary to the applicable provisions of state law, including the laws
pertaining to conflict of interest. (3-4-2003)
No ordinance or resolution shall be passed without receiving the affirmative
votes of at least three members of the council.
Each ordinance shall be headed by a brief title which shall indicate the
purport thereof.
The ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the council shall be, "The
Council of the City of Porterville do ordain as follows:"
The ordaining clause of all ordinances passed by the vote of the electors of
the city, through the exercise of the initiative shall be, "The People of the
City of Porterville do ordain as follows:"
No ordinance shall be passed by the council at any time other than at a regular
meeting, and until its publication, in a manner and for a time period as
determined and set forth by ordinance. (7-1-2014)
Except an ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election, no ordinance
passed by the council of the city of Porterville, except when otherwise
specially required by the laws of the state, and except an ordinance for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, which contains a
declaration of, and the facts constituting its urgency and is passed by a four-
fifths (4/5) vote of the council, and no ordinance granting a franchise, shall
go into effect before thirty (30) days from its final passage.
Except as otherwise provided by general law, or this charter, no action
providing for the granting of any franchise, or for the establishing or
changing fire zones, or for the imposing of any penalty, shall be taken except
by ordinance. (3-8-1983)
No ordinance, or portion thereof, shall be repealed except by ordinance. No
ordinance shall be revised, reenacted or amended by reference to its title
only; but the ordinance to be revised or reenacted, or the section or sections
thereof to be amended, or the new section or sections to be added thereto shall
be set forth and adopted according to the method provided in this section for
the enactment of ordinances, and such revision, re-enactment, amendment, or
addition, shall be made by ordinance only.
All ordinances shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk.
Sec. 13. Legislative Officers; Administrative Officers; Other Officers And
Commissions; Consolidation Of Offices.
The legislative officers of the city of Porterville shall consist of five (5)
members of the council, one of whom shall act as mayor. In addition, there
shall be the following administrative officers who shall be appointed by the
council: a city manager, a city attorney and a city clerk.
The council may, by ordinance provide for such other officers as deemed
necessary and the council may further establish by ordinance commissions deemed
by it to be necessary or proper to aid in the orderly administration of the
city of Porterville.
All members of commissions and legislative committees shall be appointed by the
council. The council may appoint members to other boards or committees.
Administrative officers may appoint members to temporary administrative
committees. (3-4-2003)
The council may, at any time, when in its judgment, the interest of the city so
demands, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote thereof, consolidate by ordinance two or
more city administrative offices and place the same in charge of one such
officer. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971; 3-8-1983)
Sec. 14. Official Bonds; Where Filed.
When in this charter not otherwise prescribed, the council shall determine
which officers shall give bonds for the faithful performance of their official
duties, and shall fix the amount of said bonds. Such officers before entering
upon their official duties, shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum
required, which bond shall include any other office of which they may be ex-
officio incumbent. Said bonds shall be approved by the council, filed with the
city clerk, and paid for by the city; provided, however, that the bond of the
city clerk when approved as aforesaid shall be filed with the city treasurer.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the authorization or furnishing of a
blanket bond to assure the honesty or faithful performance of any of its
officers or employees. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 15. Oath Of Office.
Every officer and employee of the city, before entering upon the duties of his/
her office shall take and subscribe the oath of offices as provided for in the
constitution of the state, and shall file the same forthwith with the city
clerk. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 16. Vacancies In Office; When Offices Declared Vacant.
A vacancy in any legislative office, from whatever cause arising excluding any
vacancy created due to a successful recall election, shall be filled by
appointment by the council, such appointee to hold office until the next
general municipal election, when a successor shall be chosen by the electors
for the unexpired term; provided, that if the council fails to agree or for any
other reason does not fill such vacancy within thirty days after the same
occurs, then such vacancy shall be filled by the mayor; provided, however, that
if for any reason the seats of a majority of the council shall become vacant,
then the city clerk shall call a special election at once to fill the vacancies
for the unexpired terms, and the same shall be conducted substantially in the
manner provided for general municipal elections. (3-4-2003)
If, without permission from the city council, any legislative officer of the
city shall remove from the city or absent himself/herself therefrom for more
than forty-five (45) days consecutively, or shall fail to attend five (5)
consecutive regular city council meetings unless prevented from attending by
sickness (but in no case for a period exceeding ninety (90) days), his/her
officer shall thereupon become vacant. If for said forty-five (45) day period
any legislative officer shall willfully fail or refuse to perform the duties of
his office, though able to do so, or shall fail to qualify, or shall resign, or
be convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude, or be adjudged mentally
incompetent, his/her office shall thereupon become vacant. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 17. Appointment And Removal Of Officers And Employees; Grounds Of Removal;
Hearing Prior To Removal.
Except as may be otherwise in this charter provided, the affirmative vote of
three (3) members of the council shall be required for the appointment of or
the removal of any administrative officer for cause. "For cause" includes, but
is not limited to, refusal to perform the duties of his/her office, being
adjudged mentally incompetent, or being convicted of a felony or crime of moral
turpitude. The administrative officer is entitled to a hearing before the
council on the validity of the grounds providing the basis for removal for
cause. (3-8-1983; 3-4-2003)
The council may remove any of its administrative officers at its pleasure,
without cause stated or at hearing had, by the affirmative vote of four members
cast in favor of such removal, and the determination of the council in such
matters shall be final and conclusive. (3-8-1983)
Editor's note - Prior to its complete restatement by an amendment adopted March
8, 1983, § 17 had been amended February 5, 1935, and April 6, 1971.
Sec. 17-A. Retirement Age For City Employees.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 17A. Retirement Age For City Employees Effective April 2, 1975.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 18. Compensation Of Appointive Officers And Employees; Limitation As To
Least Amount Of Compensation; Fees Abolished.
The council shall fix the compensation of all appointees and employees except
officials and members of boards, commissions and committees serving
gratuitously. Said compensation shall be fixed, increased or changed by
resolution, adopted by a three-fifths (3/5) vote of the council. (4-6-1971; 3-
4-2003)
The duties or the minimum compensation of any appointive official shall not be
so established by the council as to in effect abolish the office.
The salary of any appointive official or employee of the city shall cease
forthwith with his/her removal or resignation from office or employment,
provided, however, that the city manager may be entitled, if authorized by the
city council, to severance pay in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of 12
months' salary, subject to any other restrictions set forth by state law. (3-4-
2003; 7-1-2014)
No officer or employee shall be allowed any fee, perquisite, emolument, or
stipend, in addition to, or save as embraced in the salary or compensation
fixed for such office by the council, if a council appointee, or the manager if
a manager appointee, and all fees received by such officers or employees in
connection with his/her official duties shall be paid by him/her into the city
treasury, and a written report made of same, provided, however, that rewards
which have been publicly offered for the apprehension of criminals may be
received by the officer or officers making the apprehension, after deducting
therefrom any expense that the city may have sustained in the matter. (2-5-
1935; 4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note - The first and fifth (now fourth) paragraphs of § 18 were
amended April 6, 1971. Formerly compensation was fixed, increased or changed by
ordinance. The former second paragraph of § 18, which authorized the city
manager to fix the compensation of his appointees, was repealed.
Sec. 19. Duties Of The Mayor Generally.
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city. In case of riot,
insurrection, extraordinary emergency, or other disaster, he/she shall be
responsible for making a public declaration of a state of emergency and shall
assume all other responsibilities required of him/her pursuant to the city's
disaster plan. (3-4-2003)
In the name and on behalf of the city, he/she shall sign all contracts, deeds,
bonds and other legal instruments in which the city is a party. (3-4-2003)
He/she shall represent the city at all ceremonial functions of a social or
patriotic character when it is desirable or appropriate to have the city
represented officially thereat. (2-5-1935; 3-4-2003)
In the absence of the mayor, for whatever reason, the vice president of the
council shall assume the duties as mayor pro tempore. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 20. City Attorney; Qualification; Duties; Assistant Attorney.
The city attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, admitted to practice as such
before the supreme court of the state, and who has been in actual practice
therein for at least three years next preceding his/her appointment. All other
things being equal, an attorney who has had special training or experience in
municipal corporation law shall be appointed to this office if practicable. The
city attorney shall be legal advisor of the council, and all other city
officials. He/she shall prosecute all violations of city ordinances and shall
draft all contracts and other legal documents and instruments, required by the
council or the city manager. He/she shall perform such other legal services as
the council may direct and shall attend all meetings of the council unless
excused therefrom by three members thereof or by the mayor.
When from any cause the city attorney is unable to perform the duties of his/
her office, he/she may, with the consent of the council, appoint some other
qualified attorney to temporarily act in his/her place and whenever in the
judgment of the council, the interests of the city require it, it may employ
assistant counsel.
The city attorney shall deliver all books, records, papers, documents and
personal property of every description, owned by the city, to his/her successor
in office, and the city shall provide a means of safe-guarding the same.
He/she shall possess such other powers, and perform such additional duties, not
in conflict with this charter as may be prescribed by ordinance. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 21. City Manager; To Become Resident; Powers And Duties; Bond.
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government. The
city manager shall establish residency in the city of Porterville within a
reasonable period of time within the discretion of the council. His/her powers
and duties shall be as follows:
   (a)    To see that all ordinances are enforced.
   (b)    To appoint except as otherwise provided in this charter, all heads of
departments, subordinate officials and employees, and remove the same, except
as otherwise herein provided, and have general supervision and control over the
same.
   (c)    Repealed. (4-6-1971)
   (d)    To see that all the provisions of all franchises, permits, and
privileges granted by the city are fully observed, and report to the council
any violation thereof.
   (e)    To act, as purchasing agent for the city, should he/she be so
appointed by the council.
   (f)    To attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the
council or mayor.
   (g)    To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the conduct of
any officer or employee of the city.
   (h)    To keep the council advised as to the needs of the city.
   (i)    To devote his/her entire time to the interests of the city.
   (j),    (k) Repealed. (4-6-1971)
   (l)    Repealed. (3-4-2003)
   (m)    To possess such other powers and perform such additional duties as
are prescribed by this charter, or may be prescribed by ordinance. (2-5-1935)
   (n)    Repealed. (4-6-1971)
Sec. 22. City Manager Pro Tem.
In case of an illness, scheduled vacation or scheduled absence from the city of
the city manager, for a period of up to thirty (30) days, the individual
designated as the deputy city manager shall serve as city manager pro tem. In
the event that a deputy city manager has not been designated or the deputy city
manager is otherwise unable to serve, the city manager shall appoint one of the
existing directors of the city departments to serve as city manager pro tem.
(3-4-2003)
In the case of any other absence, excluding a vacancy of the city manager
position, from the city of the city manager, or his/her temporary disability to
act as such, the council shall appoint a city manager pro tem, who shall
possess the powers and discharge the duties of the city manager during such
absence or disability only; provided, however, that a city manager pro tem
shall have no authority to appoint or remove any city department director
except with the unanimous formal approval of all of the members of the council.
In the event that the city manager position is vacant, the council shall
appoint a city manager or acting/interim city manager in accordance with
sections 13 and 17 of this charter. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 23. City Clerk; To Be Clerk Of The Council When So Appointed; Duties; To
Keep Corporate Seal.
The city clerk shall be clerk of the council when so appointed by the council.
(3-4-2003)
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attend all sessions of the council
and keep a full and correct record of the proceedings of each of said bodies.
The proceedings of the council shall be kept in a book marked "Minutes of the
Council." He/she shall keep a book marked "Ordinances" into which he/she shall
copy all city ordinances certifying that each such copy is a full and correct
copy of the original ordinance, and stating that the same has been published as
required by law. Said record copy, so certified, shall be prima facie evidence
of the contents of the ordinance, and of its passage and publication and shall
be admissible as such evidence in any court or proceedings. Such record shall
not be filed but shall be returned to the custody of the city clerk. He/she
shall also keep a book marked "Resolutions," into which he/she shall copy all
resolutions passed by the council. Both the books containing ordinances and
resolutions, shall be adequately and comprehensively indexed. He/she shall
conduct promptly, and keep a systematic record of all correspondence between
the council and third parties relating to city business.
He/she shall be the keeper of the corporate seal of the city, and shall affix
the same to instruments or writings requiring authentication. He/she shall
safely keep all records, documents, ordinances, resolutions, books and such
other papers and matters, as may be regularly delivered into his/her custody or
required by law or ordinance to be filed with him/her. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971; 3-
4-2003)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 23 was amended April 6, 1971 by the
addition of the words "when so appointed by the council." The former fourth
paragraph of § 23 relating to the clerk's duties as assessor, was repealed
April 6, 1971.
Sec. 24. Director Of Finance; Payment Of Demands; To Check Annual Tax Roll.
The city manager shall appoint the director of finance of the city, who shall
serve as the general accountant of the city. He/she shall receive and preserve
in his office all accounts, books, vouchers, documents and papers relating to
the accounts of the city, its debts, revenues and other financial affairs. He/
she shall keep an account of all moneys paid into and out of the treasury; and
keep informed as to the exact condition of the treasury at all times. (4-6-
1971)
Every demand upon the treasury, before its approval by the council, must be
presented to the director of finance, who shall satisfy himself/herself whether
the money is legally due, and its payment authorized by law. If satisfactory,
he/she shall draw a warrant upon the treasury for the payment thereof. Every
demand approved by the director of finance shall specify on its face the
several items composing it, with the amounts and dates thereof. The approval of
the council shall not be necessary to draw warrants for the payment of regular
salaries of officials and employees of the city, or for payment of any
obligation previously authorized by law, or by resolution or order of the
council. (4-6-1971)
He/she shall render each month a statement to the council showing the financial
condition of the city, and annually a like statement covering all of the
financial transactions of the city during the year previous.
After the annual tax roll has been completed, and before it is deposited with
the collector, the director of finance shall make a check of the roll
correcting any errors that may be found and endorse same with his/her approval.
(4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note - The first, second and fourth paragraphs of § 24 were amended
April 6, 1971. Formerly the auditor was the general accountant of the city who
performed the duties set out in the section.
Sec. 25. City Treasurer; Appointment; Duties; Bond.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 26. Repealed April 2, 1963.
Sec. 27. Chief Of Police; Duties; Appointment And Removal Of Subordinates; To
Make Rules And Regulations.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 28. Fire Chief; Appointment; Duties And Powers.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 29. Collector; Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 30. City Engineer; Powers And Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 31. Office Of Purchasing Agent Authorized; Duties Of Heads Of Offices To
Submit Estimates To Agent; Duties Generally; Competitive Bidding; Preference To
Local Merchants.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 32. Street Superintendent.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 33. Qualifications Of Health Officer; Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 34. Vacations.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 35. Additional Duties Of Officers.
Besides the duties herein specified, all officers and boards shall perform such
other appropriate duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or the general laws.
Sec. 36. Officers And Employees To Continue In Office Until Successor Elected
Or Qualified.
Until the election or appointment and induction into office of the officers and
employees in this charter provided for, the present officers and employees
shall without interruption, continue to perform the duties of their respective
offices and employments for the compensation provided by existing ordinance or
laws.
Sec. 37. Resignations From Office; Candidates For Office Not Required To Resign
From Other Office Prior To Appointment Or Qualification; When Resignation
Effective.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 38. Officers And Boards Having Power To Administer Oaths And Issue
Subpoenas; Contempt Proceedings.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 39. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July of each
year, or at such other time as may be fixed by ordinance. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 40. Taxation To Conform To General Laws Of The State.
Except as otherwise herein provided the council shall, by ordinance, provide a
system for the assessment, equalization, levy, and collection of taxes, which,
as nearly as may be, shall conform to the system provided by the general laws
of the state; provided, that all sales for delinquent taxes shall be made to
the city of Porterville. Should the council fail to fix the tax rate within the
time prescribed, then the tax rate of the previous year shall constitute the
rate for the current year.
Sec. 41. Board Of Equalization.
Repealed March 4, 2003.
Sec. 42. Annual Tax Levy To Be Affixed.
The council, not later than its second regular meeting in August, shall fix a
rate of taxation sufficient to raise the amounts established by council action
pursuant to section 44. The council shall notify the county assessor who shall
thereupon compute and carry out the amount of tax so levied on each parcel of
property contained in the assessment roll for the city. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, § 42 was amended by changing the meeting
date from the first regular meeting in September to the second regular meeting
in August.
Sec. 43. Limitation On Tax Levy.
Repealed March 4, 2003.
Sec. 44. Limitation On Special Tax Levies; Enumeration Of Purposes For Which
Special Taxes May Be Levied.
The council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes, in addition to the
taxes herein or by general law authorized to be levied and collected,
sufficient to pay and maintain the sinking fund of the bonded indebtedness of
the city; and for the following purposes: (4-6-1971)
   (a)    For the support and maintenance of the fire department, for fire
protection purposes, at the rate of not more than three mills on each dollar of
the assessed valuation of the real and personal property within the city; (4-6-
1971)
   (b)    For the acquisition, construction and maintenance, as the case may
be, of permanent public improvements, of real property, of public buildings and
structures, and of public offices, including equipping and furnishing the same,
at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar thereof;
   (c)    For the maintenance and support of free public libraries and reading
rooms in said city, at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar
thereof.
   (d)    For the maintenance and support of free public parks and playgrounds
in said city, at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar thereof;
   (e)    For music, entertainment, and promotion, at the rate of not more than
one mill on each dollar thereof. (2-5-1935; 4-5-1949)
Amendment note - The first paragraph and subsection (a) of § 44 were amended
April 6, 1971. In the first paragraph the words "at not to exceed the following
rates" was deleted. In subsection (a), the rate was changed from five mills to
three mills and the firemen's relief fund was eliminated as a purpose.
Sec. 45. Taxes And Assessments To Constitute A Lien; Foreclosure.
All taxes and assessments levied, together with any percentages imposed for
delinquency and cost of collection, shall constitute liens on the property
assessed; every tax upon the personal property shall be a lien upon the real
property of the owner thereof. The liens provided for in this section shall
attach as of the first Monday in March each year and may be enforced by actions
to foreclose such liens in any court of competent jurisdiction, or by a sale of
the property affected and the execution and delivery of all necessary
certificates and deeds therefor, under such regulations as may be prescribed by
ordinance; provided that when real estate is offered for sale for city taxes
due thereon the same shall be sold to the city in like case and manner, and
with like effect and right of redemption as it may be struck off and sold to
the state when offered for sale for county taxes; and the council shall have
power to provide by ordinance for the procedure to be followed in such sales to
the city and redemption thereafter.
Sec. 46. Disposition Of City Money.
All moneys collected for the city by any officer or department thereof shall be
paid into the treasury daily if possible, and at least once each week.
Sec. 47. Application Of Surplus Bond Money.
All moneys derived from the sale of bonds, including premiums and accrued
interest, shall be applied to the purposes for which the bonds were voted.
After such purposes have been fully completed and paid for, any remaining
surplus shall be transferred to the bond and interest redemption fund.
Sec. 48. Payment Of City Money; Expenditures And Indebtedness; Presentation Of
Demands; Warrants On Treasury.
No money shall be expended on behalf of the city, for any purpose, unless and
until the same shall have been authorized by a majority vote of the council;
provided that following every council election, the city council may, by a
majority vote, adjust the amount of money that may be expended on behalf of the
city, without prior specific council authorization. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The city council, by resolution by a majority vote of the council, shall
establish the maximum amount of money to be expended on behalf of the city
without first requiring specific council authorization, except as otherwise
provided for in this charter; provided further that said maximum amount once
established by resolution shall not be adjusted until after each general
council election. (7-1-2014)
No indebtedness shall be incurred on behalf of the city, for any purpose,
unless and until the same shall have been authorized by resolution by a four-
fifths (4/5) vote of the council; provided that following every council
election, the city council may, by a four-fifths majority vote, adjust the
amount of indebtedness that may be incurred, on behalf of the city, without
prior specific council authorization. (7-1-2014)
The city council, by resolution approved by a four-fifths vote of the council,
shall establish the maximum amount of indebtedness to be incurred on behalf of
the city without first requiring specific council authorization, except as
otherwise provided for in this charter; provided further that said maximum
amount once established shall not be adjusted until after each general council
election, and then only by resolution by a four-fifths majority vote. (3-4-
2003; 7-1-2014)
Indebtedness evidenced by general obligation bonds shall be incurred by the
city only if approved by the city council and authorized by the voters as
required by the constitution and general laws of the state. (7-1-2014)
All demands against the city shall, before being paid, be presented to and
approved by the proper board, commission or officer, as herein provided.
Demands for which no appropriation has been made shall be presented to the city
manager, provided, that any person dissatisfied with the refusal of the city
manager to approve any demand, in whole or in part, may present the same to the
council, and the approval of such demand by the council shall have the same
effect as its approval by the city manager; and provided further, that if the
council shall provide for other boards or commissions, it may make provision
for the presentation to and approval by any such board or commission of demands
for liabilities incurred by them. (7-1-2014)
The council may provide for a revolving cash fund as authorized by ordinance by
four-fifths majority vote of the council; provided that effective January 1,
2004, and following every council election thereafter, the city council may, by
a four-fifths majority vote, adjust the revolving cash fund. The amount shall
be paid to the city manager, and used by him/her for the payment in cash, of
expenditures provided for in the budgets that cannot conveniently be paid
otherwise. He or she shall account to the council for all payments by him or
her out of said fund when making demand for the replenishment of the same, and
at such other times as the council may require, and they shall thereupon be
charged against the proper appropriations. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
All demands approved by the proper board, commission or officer shall be
presented to the director of finance, who shall examine the same, and if the
amount thereof is legally due and there remains on his books an unexhausted
balance or an appropriation against which the same may be charged, he/she shall
approve such demand and draw and sign his warrant on the treasurer therefor,
payable out of the proper fund. Objections of the director of finance to any
demand may be overruled by the council, and the director of finance shall
thereupon draw his warrant as directed by the council. Such warrants, when
presented to the treasurer, shall be paid by him/her out of the fund therein
designated, if there be sufficient money in such fund for that purpose. A
warrant not paid for lack of funds shall be registered, and all registered
warrants shall be paid in the order of registration when funds are available
therefor; all such registered warrants shall bear interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum. The director of finance shall draw his/her warrants for
payment of municipal or other bonds payable out of the funds in the treasury
upon presentation and surrender of the proper bonds or coupons without approval
of anybody or officer. The council may make further regulations by ordinance
regarding the presentation, approval and payment of demands against the city.
(3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 49. Monthly Financial Reports Required.
All officers required by this charter or by ordinance to submit monthly
financial reports to the council, shall submit the same in duplicate, and upon
their approval by the council, one of each of such duplicate reports shall be
posted forthwith in the office of the city clerk in such manner as to be
readily accessible to the public, and shall remain so posted until the approval
by the council of the next succeeding financial report when the same procedure
shall be followed in relation thereto. The council, in addition to such
posting, may, in its discretion, cause any of such reports to be published at
any time.
Sec. 50. Approving Illegal Claims To Forfeit Office.
Every officer who shall wilfully approve, allow or pay, any demand on the
treasury not authorized by law, shall be liable to the city individually and on
his/her official bond for the amount of the demand so approved, allowed, or
paid, and shall forfeit his/her office and be forever disbarred from holding
any position in the service of the city.
Sec. 51. Annual Budget Contents; Publication.
Not later than thirty days before the end of the city's fiscal year, the city
manager shall submit to the council an estimate of the expenditures and
revenues of the city departments for the ensuing year. This estimate shall be
compiled from detailed information obtained from the several departments on
uniform blanks to be furnished by the manager. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sufficient copies of such estimate shall be prepared and submitted that there
may be copies on file in the office of the council for inspection by the
public, unless the council shall publish the same in a newspaper.
After duly considering the estimate and making such corrections or
modifications thereto as shall seem advisable to it, the council shall by
resolution adopt a general budget and such resolution shall operate as an
appropriation of funds to the amounts and for the purposes set forth in the
budget so adopted. At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the
council, by a vote of three (3) members, may amend or supplement so as to
authorize the transfer of unused balances for one purpose to another purpose or
to appropriate available revenues not included in the budget. (3-4-2003)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, the first paragraph of § 51, was amended by
deleting the second sentence relating to classification of the estimated
expenditures.
Sec. 51A. General Reserve Fund; Purposes.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 52. Uniform Accounts And Reports.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 53. Written Investment Policy.
The city manager shall recommend and the city council by resolution shall adopt
a policy to govern the investment of all city monies, which policy shall be
consistent with applicable state law and shall, at a minimum, provide for the
investment of all monies in such a manner as to assure the preservation and
safety of principal and the integrity of record keeping; identify the types of
allowable investments; and provide for the safekeeping of securities. (3-4-
2003)
Sec. 54. Applicability Of General Laws.
All general laws of the state applicable to municipal corporations now or
hereafter enacted, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this
charter or the ordinance of the city hereafter enacted shall be applicable to
the city. The council may adopt and enforce ordinances which in relation to
municipal affairs, shall control as against general laws of the state.
Sec. 55. Repealed April 2, 1963.
Sec. 56. Public Library.
The free public library of the city of Porterville shall be established,
conducted, carried on, managed and operated in accordance with rules,
regulations and ordinances passed and adopted by the council of the city of
Porterville. (4-7-1959)
Sec. 57. Park Commission; Composition; Term; Powers And Duties; Authority To
Accept Donations, Legacies Or Bequests.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 58. Pensions.
The council shall have and is hereby granted full power and authority to
establish, regulate, maintain, revise and amend, a retirement, disability,
death benefit and pension system, or either or any of them, for its elective
and appointive officers and employees of the city of Porterville and their
dependents. Authority and power is hereby vested in the city of Porterville,
its council, its officers, agents and employees to do and perform any act or
exercise any authority granted, permitted or required whereby the city of
Porterville may fully participate in a retirement, disability, death benefit
and pension system for its employees.
A system for retirement, disability, death benefit and pension rights for
employees and their dependents authorized by this section when established by
the council, shall not be terminated without securing the approval of a
majority of the electors of the city of Porterville at an election held
therefor, except as may be permitted by applicable state law. (4-6-1971; 7-1-
2014)
The city shall levy and collect taxes sufficient to pay all costs and expenses
required to be paid by the city of Porterville to enable the city of
Porterville to participate in any such retirement, disability, death benefit or
pension system established, set up or maintained by, for or on behalf of the
city of Porterville and the limitations of section forty-three of the charter
of the city of Porterville, with respect to levying and collecting of municipal
taxes, shall not apply to any tax authorized by this article. (4-9-1951; 4-10-
1961)
Amendment note - The second paragraph of § 58 was amended April 6, 1971, by
eliminating the former first sentence pertaining to employees of the
Porterville Public Library.
This section shall be construed in accordance with the California constitution
and shall be deemed to allow the city to create, eliminate, or modify its
pension and retiree healthcare benefits to the fullest extent permitted by the
California constitution and applicable law. (7-1-2014)
Sec. 59. Employment Of Certified Public Accountant To Audit City Books.
The city council shall employ a certified public accountant annually to
investigate the accounts and transactions of all city officers and employees
having the collection, custody or distribution of public money or property, or
the power to approve, allow or audit demands on the city treasury. (2-5-1935;
4-2-1963; 4-6-1971)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, § 59 was amended by the addition of the word
"council" following the second word of the section.
Sec. 60. Financial Interests Prohibited.
City officers and employees are prohibited from having a financial interest in
any contract, sales or purchases in accordance with applicable state law. (3-4-
2003)
Sec. 61. Competitive Bidding For Contract Work For Erection, Improvement And
Repair Of Public Buildings, Etc., Where The Amount Is In Excess Of Five
Thousand Dollars.
When a required expenditure exceeds five thousand dollars, it shall be
contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. (4-6-
1971)
As used in this section public project means a project for the erection,
improvement and repair of public buildings and works; work in or about streams,
embankments, or other work for protection against overflow; street sewer work
except maintenance or repair; furnishing supplies or materials for any such
project, including maintenance or repair of streets, sewers or water lines.
The council may reject any or all bids presented and may, at its discretion,
readvertise for other bids, or, the council may, after rejecting bids,
determine and declare by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of all of its members that
the work in question may be more economically or satisfactorily performed by
day labor, or the labor or materials purchased at a lower price in the open
market and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect it may proceed to
have the same done in the manner stated without further observance of the
foregoing provisions of this section.
The notice inviting sealed bids shall set a date for the opening of bids; the
first publication shall be at least ten (10) days before the date of the
opening of the bids; shall be published at least twice not less than five (5)
days apart in the official newspaper selected by the council.
In case of a great public calamity, such as an extraordinary fire, flood,
storm, epidemic or other disaster, the council may, by resolution passed by a
vote of four- fifths (4/5) of its members, determine and declare that the
public interest or necessity demands the immediate expenditure of public money
to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon they may proceed without
advertising for bids or receiving the same, to expend, or enter into a contract
involving the expenditure of any money required in such emergency, on hand in
the city treasury and available for such purpose. (4-10-1961)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 61 was amended April 6, 1971 by
increasing the amount from $2,500.00 to $5,000.00.
Sec. 62. Public Improvements.
The improvement widening and opening of streets, the planting, care, and
maintenance of trees, and the making of any other public improvement may be
done and assessments therefor may be levied in conformity with and under the
authority conferred by general laws; provided, however, that the council may by
ordinance adopt a procedure for the improvement and repair of streets, alleys
or other public places, the laying of pipes, or conduits or for the planting,
care or maintenance of trees, or for the removal of dirt, rubbish, weeds and
other rank growth and materials which may injure or endanger neighboring
property or the health or the welfare of inhabitants of the vicinity, from
buildings, lots and grounds and the sidewalks opposite thereto and for making
and enforcing assessments against property benefitted or affected thereby, or
from which such removal is made, for the cost of such improvements or removal
and may make such assessments a lien on such property superior to all other
claims or liens thereon, except state, county and municipal taxes, but no such
ordinance shall prevent the council from proceeding under general laws for said
purposes.
Sec. 63. Franchises; Limitation On Renewals.
Every franchise or privilege to construct, maintain, or operate, any means or
method of transportation in or over any street, lane, alley or other public
place within the city or to lay pipes or conduits, or erect poles or wires or
other structures in or across any such public way or place, for the
transmission of gas, electricity, or other commodity, or for the use of public
property or places now or hereafter owned by the city, shall be granted under
and in pursuance of the general franchises; provided, no new franchise or the
renewal of any existing franchises shall be granted except upon the condition
that at least two percent of the gross annual receipts derived from the use of
such franchise shall be paid to the city. In all cases the applicant for a
franchise shall advance the cost of advertising the same.
Every such franchise shall require the grantee thereof to agree to a joint use
of its property with others, wherever practicable, and nothing herein shall be
construed as prohibiting the council from requiring other conditions in
granting the same not inconsistent with the constitution and general laws. No
franchise or privilege so granted shall be sold, leased, assigned or otherwise
alienated, without the express consent of the council given by ordinance and
subject to referendum.
Sec. 64. When Franchise Required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall exercise any franchise or privilege,
except to the extent he or it may be entitled to do so by the constitution of
the state, or of the United States, in, upon, under, over, or along any street,
public way, or public place in the city without having first obtained a grant
therefor as provided in this charter and by general law.
Sec. 65. Newspaper Advertising And Printing.
The council shall advertise annually for the submission of sealed proposals or
bids from newspapers of general circulation in the city, for the publication of
all ordinances and other legal notices required to be published. The newspaper
to whom such contract is awarded shall be known and designated as the official
newspaper. The rates for publishing public notices shall not exceed the
customary rates charged for publishing legal notices of a private character.
(3-4-2003)
Contracts for legal advertising shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder, provided no contract for legal advertising shall be awarded to any
newspaper except a daily newspaper of general circulation, as defined by the
Government Code. (4-6-1971)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 65 was amended April 6, 1971 by
inserting the word "legal" before the word, "advertising"; by substituting
"Government Code" in lieu of "Section 4460, of the Political Code." The former
third paragraph reading, "Required printed office supplies may be purchased
either through bids and contract, or by purchase in the open market," was
repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 66. Public Records; Delivery And Safekeeping Of Documents.
The public shall have access to public records kept and maintained by the city
in accordance with the law. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 67. Interference With Performance Of Duties Of City Manager; Interference
By City Manager In Elections.
No member of the council shall in any manner attempt to influence or coerce the
city manager in the making of any appointment or the purchase of supplies in
accordance with applicable state and federal law. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The council shall deal with the administrative functions of the city through
the city manager. The council shall only have direct contact with the directors
of the city's departments for the purpose of asking questions. (3-4-2003; 7-1-
2014)
Any city council member violating the provisions of this section, or voting for
a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall cease to be a council member.
Additionally, any city council member violating this section may be subject to
civil remedies as specified in section 74. (7-1-2014)
Section 67.1. Political Activities By Legislative And Administrative Officers,
Employees.
Political activities of and campaign contributions by the city's legislative
officers, administrative officers, and employees shall be governed in
accordance with applicable state and federal law. All legislative and
administrative officers and all city employees are prohibited from engaging in
political activities during working hours. City officers and employees are
prohibited from engaging in political activities at their work place. (3-4-
2003; 7-1-2014)
Furthermore, city officers and employees are prohibited from engaging in
political activities on city properties, provided this prohibition does not
pertain to property that is otherwise open to the public for the purpose of
engaging in political activities. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 68. Leases Of City Property.
In every lease of city property the basic amount of rental shall be fixed by
the council.
All indentures of lease shall provide that the council may terminate the same
at its pleasure and repossess the premises therein described upon three months'
notice thereof and upon paying to the lessee the market value of any
improvements made or put upon said premises by the lessee. The market value of
such improvements shall be determined by a board of appraisers consisting of
one appraiser appointed by the council, and a lessee appraiser appointed by the
lessee.
In the event of their failure to agree upon the market value of the
improvements within thirty days from and after their appointment, said two
appraisers may appoint a third appraiser as a member of said board, and the
determination of the majority of said board of appraisers, as to the market
value of the improvements, shall be final and conclusive and binding on all
concerned. Should the two appraisers appointed by the council and the lessee
respectively, fail for forty days from and after their appointment to agree
upon the market value of the improvements or to appoint a third appraiser, then
upon the petition in writing of either party to any such lease, a judge of the
superior court of Tulare County is hereby empowered to appoint the third
appraiser upon such board; provided, however, that the council shall not
terminate any such lease or repossess any such premises except for a public use
and purpose; provided, further, that no lease of city property shall be made
for a maximum term of more than fifty years. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971)
Amendment note - The second paragraph of § 68 was amended April 6, 1971, by
substituting "maximum term" in lieu of "term" in the last proviso clause.
Sec. 69. Inventory Of City Property.
At the time for preparing and submitting the budget, as prescribed by this
charter, a complete inventory of all personal property belonging to the city
shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk, and such inventory shall be
submitted to the council by the city manager at the time of the submission of
the annual budget. Such inventory shall be prepared under the direction of the
city manager, and all chief officials and department heads of the city shall be
responsible for making and transmitting to the city manager a full and correct
inventory of all city personal property in their possession or under their
control.
Sec. 70. Equipment.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 71. Zoning Authorized.
The council of the city of Porterville shall have the power to establish such
zoning systems within the city as may in its judgment be most beneficial, and
in such zoning systems may prohibit the erection or maintenance of any class or
classes of buildings within certain areas, and may classify, and reclassify the
zones established. The council may also prescribe the character of materials
and methods of construction of buildings erected within any zone area, and may
establish setback lines as it may consider necessary and proper. (4-6-1971)
Sec. 72. Suspension Of Employees From Office And Fines.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 73. Natural Or Other Disasters.
The city shall have in place a disaster plan, consistent with county, state and
federal policies, to be implemented in the event of an emergency or disaster.
Sec. 74. Violations.
This section shall apply only if a penalty/violation is not otherwise
explicitly provided for in the charter. A violation of any provision of this
charter shall be a misdemeanor with maximum fines and imprisonment as allowed
by law, except that such violation may be prosecuted as an infraction, at the
discretion of the city attorney. (7-1-2014)
Any violation of this charter may be prosecuted in the name of the people of
the state of California or may be redressed by the city through any legal or
equitable remedies; including but not limited to civil action and/or
injunction, or administrative citation in accordance with adopted city
ordinances. To the fullest extent allowed by law, civil remedies may be
utilized in addition to or as an alternative to criminal enforcement. (7-1-
2014)
The city shall be authorized to recover its full costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, for the enforcement of any violation of this charter or
municipal code. The city council is authorized to adopt any necessary or
appropriate ordinances to implement this section of the charter. (7-1-2014)
