CHARTER
Article I. Introductory
§ 1   Name.
   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Sacramento
shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate in name and fact by the
name of the City of Sacramento and by such name shall have perpetual
succession.
§ 2   Boundaries.
   The boundaries of the City of Sacramento, as they exist on the effective
date of this section, shall continue until changed in the manner authorized by
law.
§ 3   Rights in succession.
   The City of Sacramento, hereinafter termed the city, shall have, exercise
and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers, benefits, privileges and
franchises now possessed, enjoyed, owned or held by it.
§ 4   Continuance of laws.
   All lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations or portions
thereof now in force and not in conflict or inconsistent herewith are continued
in force until they have been duly repealed or amended.
§ 5   Offices.
   The city council may establish departments, divisions, offices and positions
of employment not established by this Charter or created thereunder and shall
have the power to abolish, merge or consolidate same.
   The city council may also provide for the performance by the County of
Sacramento of all or any municipal functions which may now or hereafter be
performed by said county, including municipal functions specifically provided
for in this Charter. The city council may abolish the appropriate city
departments, offices and employments when such municipal functions are to be
provided by the County of Sacramento.
Article II. Powers
§ 10   General powers.
   The city shall have the right and power to make and enforce all the laws and
regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to the restrictions
and limitations provided in this Charter; provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent or restrict the city from exercising or consenting to, and
the city is hereby authorized to exercise, any and all rights, powers and
privileges heretofore or hereafter granted or prescribed by the general laws of
the state including those specifically applicable to general law cities;
provided, also that where the general laws of the state provide a procedure for
the carrying out and the enforcement of any rights or powers belonging to the
city, said procedure may be followed unless a different procedure is provided
or required by the Charter, ordinance or resolution.
   It is the intention of the people in adopting this section to take advantage
of the provisions of Section 5 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State
of California giving cities Home Rule as to municipal affairs.
§ 11   Water supply and meters.
   The supply of water for the City of Sacramento for municipal and domestic
purposes shall always be owned and controlled as a municipal utility and shall
be administered by the city government. No water meters shall ever be attached
to residential water service pipes; provided, however, that the city council in
its discretion may regulate by meter the charges for water supply of all other
water users.
Article III. The City Council
§ 20   Powers.
   All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council except as
otherwise provided in this Charter.
§ 21   Composition.
   The legislative body or the city shall be a city council of nine members,
consisting of the mayor and eight other members. Each council member other than
the mayor shall be nominated and elected by the electors of the district in
which such person resides as provided in Article X.
§ 22   Districts.
   The City is hereby divided into eight council districts, designated
Districts 1 through 8, respectively. Council districts in existence on the
effective date of this Charter amendment shall continue to exist until altered
as provided in Article XII. The title of the office of each member of the
council other than the mayor shall bear the number accorded the council
district of such member. (Amended by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§§ 23-25   Repealed.
   (Repealed by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 26   Terms of office.
   Each member of the city council other than the mayor shall serve for a term
of four years and until a successor qualifies.
§ 27   Qualifications of members.
   Each member of the council or candidate therefor, other than for the office
of mayor, at the date of candidacy and election or appointment, shall be an
elector and a resident in such member's council district for not less than 30
days preceding the date of candidacy and election or appointment, as the case
may be, and must continue to reside in such council district during the term of
office, except that no boundary change under Article XII shall disqualify a
member from serving the remainder of the term. The term "elector" means a
person who qualifies to vote at either a state election or federal election
held in the State of California. "Date of candidacy" means the date of filing
nominating papers or equivalent declaration of candidacy. (Amended by Res.
2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 28   Vacancies.
   A vacancy on the city council other than the office of the mayor shall be
filled by special election to be called by the council as provided in Section
154 of this Charter, unless such vacancy occurs within one year of the next
general election at which such office would normally be filled, in which case
the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining
members of the council. A person elected or appointed to fill a vacancy shall
hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent.
   Absence from five consecutive regular meetings of the city council, unless
excused by resolution of the council, shall operate to vacate the seat of the
mayor or council member so absent.
§ 29   Compensation.
   There shall be established a compensation commission whose function shall be
to establish the compensation for the mayor, members of the city council, and
public members of city boards and commissions. The commission shall be
comprised of five members selected pursuant to Section
230 of
Article XV of this Charter for staggered four-year terms. The chair of the
commission shall be a retired judicial officer and all members shall be
residents of the City of Sacramento. The commission shall meet at least once a
year and shall serve without compensation. The city shall fund the expenses of
the commission. Within one hundred eighty (180) days of passage of this
measure, the commission shall set the compensation for the mayor and members of
the city council. Compensation shall be reasonable and consistent with other
cities similar in size and structure.
§ 30   Rules, quorum and voting.
   (a)   The city council shall determine its rules of procedure according to
rules which it shall adopt.
   (b)   A majority of the members of the council then in office shall
constitute a quorum, except that a lesser number may adjourn from time to time
and may compel attendance or absent members in a manner provided by ordinance
or resolution.
   (c)   The city council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter the affirmative vote of five
council members or the council shall be necessary to pass any ordinance,
resolution or motion. The council shall be a continuing body and no measure
pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the
expiration of the term of office or removal of the members of said body or any
of them.
§ 31   Meetings.
   The city council shall hold regular meetings and provide the time, place,
and manner of holding its meetings, by annual resolution. A majority of regular
council meetings shall be held after 5:00 p.m. All meetings of the council
shall be open to the public, except as permitted by state law. (Amended by Res.
2018-0317, 7/31/18)
§ 32   Ordinances.
   (a)   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing. The enacting
clause of each ordinance enacted by the council shall be "Be it Enacted by the
Council of the City of Sacramento." The enacting clause of each ordinance
enacted by the initiative or referendum process shall be "Be it Enacted by the
People of the City of Sacramento." Each ordinance shall contain a title which
shall state in general terms the subject or subjects contained in the
ordinance.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Charter, and with the
exception or ordinances which take effect immediately upon adoption, ordinances
shall be adopted in compliance with either the procedure set forth in
Subsection (c) or Subsection (d) of this section.
   (c)   The ordinance shall be first passed by the council for publication of
title. At least six days shall elapse between the date the ordinance was passed
for publication of title and the date it is adopted by the council. The title
of the ordinance shall be published by printing said title in a newspaper of
general circulation published within the City designated by the council as the
official newspaper of the City, no later than the third day immediately
preceding the date of the adoption of the ordinance. No part of any ordinance,
or proposed ordinance, other than its title, need be published.
   (d)   In lieu of the procedure set forth in Subsection (c) of this section,
ordinances shall be published in the official newspaper of the City within ten
days after adoption by the council.
   (e)   Ordinances which take effect immediately upon adoption, may be adopted
without compliance with Subsections (b), (c) or (d) of this section.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, each adopted ordinance
shall become effective at the expiration of thirty (30) days after adoption or
at any later date specified therein.
   (g)   The following ordinances shall take effect immediately upon adoption
or at such later dates, of less than thirty (30) days after adoption, as may be
specified in the ordinances:
      (1)   An ordinance calling for or otherwise relating to an election;
      (2)   An ordinance adopted as and declared by the city council to be an
emergency measure, containing a statement of the facts constituting such
emergency, if adopted by the affirmative votes of at least six members of the
council; provided, that no measure making a grant, renewal or extension of a
franchise or other special privilege or regulating the rate to be charged for
its service by a public utility, other than one operated by the city, may be so
enacted; and
      (3)   An ordinance adopted pursuant to a state law by virtue or which
such ordinance shall be effective immediately.
   (h)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require an
ordinance when an ordinance is not otherwise required. (Adopted November 4,
1980)
§ 33   Records.
   The city council shall require the city clerk to keep a permanent public
record of its proceedings showing all action considered and taken, motions and
records, the text of ordinances and resolutions introduced or adopted and all
amendments thereto proposed or adopted, and the vote of each council member
regarding any matter before the city council or any committee thereof.
§ 34   Investigations.
   The city council or any duly appointed committee of the members of the
council may make investigations into the affairs of the city government and the
conduct of any department, office, agency, officer or employee thereof, and for
this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and
require the production of evidence. Any person who fails to obey a lawful order
issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council or a committee of
the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by fine or
imprisonment, or both, in such amount and for such time as prescribed by state
law for misdemeanors.
§ 35   Limitation on future employment.
   No member of the council during the term for which such person shall have
been elected or appointed or for one year after such person ceases to hold
office, shall be eligible for any appointive office or position in the city,
carrying compensation, and created by this Charter, by ordinance or by
resolution. An elective office which has been filled by appointment by reason
of a vacancy in that office shall not be considered an appointive office under
this section.
Article IV. Mayor
§ 40   Mayor-Functions.
   (a)   The presiding officer of the city shall be the mayor.
   (b)   The mayor:
      (1)   Shall be recognized as the official head of the city for the
performance of all duties lawfully delegated to the mayor by this Charter, by
action of the council or by other laws.
      (2)   Shall provide leadership within the community in the sense that the
mayor shall have the primary, but not exclusive, responsibility of interpreting
the policies, programs and needs of city government to the people, and as the
occasion requires, may inform the people of any change in policy or program;
      (3)   Shall have the right but not the exclusive power to make
recommendations to the city council on matters of policy and program that
require council decisions;
      (4)   Shall be a member of the city council and shall be entitled to make
and second motions on matters before the city council and vote on city council
actions, but shall possess no veto power over actions of the city council;
      (5)   Shall be included within the terms "council" and "city council"
used in this Charter unless otherwise expressly provided;
      (6)   May propose ordinances and resolutions which shall be considered by
the city council;
      (7)   Shall appoint and may remove members of the boards and commissions
and advisory agencies in accordance with Article XV except as otherwise
provided in this Charter;
      (8)   Shall have and exercise such other powers and duties as provided in
this Charter, the laws of the state, and ordinances and resolutions of the
city.
§ 41   Mayor-Qualifications.
   The mayor or candidate therefore, at the date of candidacy and election or
appointment, shall be an elector and a resident of the city not less than 30
days prior to the date of candidacy and election or appointment, as the case
may be, and shall continue to reside in the city during the term of office. The
term "elector" shall have the meaning given in Section 27 of Article III. "Date
of candidacy" shall mean the date of filing nomination papers or equivalent
declaration or candidacy.
§ 42   Mayor-Election.
   The mayor shall be elected from the city at large as provided in Section
152 or
Article X of this Charter.
§ 43   Mayor-Term.
   The term of office of mayor shall be four years, and until a successor
qualifies.
§ 44   Mayor-Compensation and expenses for full-time service.
   The mayor shall serve full-time and shall receive compensation as
established by the compensation commission pursuant to Section
29 of
Article III of this Charter. The mayor shall devote his or her full time and
attention to the duties of the office.
§ 45   Vice-Mayor; Mayor Pro Tem.
   At the first council meeting in January of each year, the city council shall
elect one of its members, other than the mayor, to serve as vice-mayor during
the ensuing calendar year.
   During any absence of the mayor from the city or a meeting of the city
council, the vice-mayor shall be the acting mayor until the mayor returns. In
addition, if the mayor becomes incapable of acting as mayor and incapable of
delegating duties, or if a vacancy exists in the office of mayor, the vice-
mayor shall become the acting mayor.
   In the event of the absence, vacancy in office or inability of both the
mayor and vice-mayor to perform their duties, the council may appoint one of
its members to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall temporarily act
in the capacity of an acting mayor. Any person serving as an acting mayor under
this section shall continue to hold office as a member of the city council.
   An acting mayor shall possess all powers of the office of mayor and shall be
subject to all prescribed duties for such office.
§ 46   Mayor-Vacancy.
   A vacancy in the office of the mayor shall be filled by special election to
be called by the city council as provided in Section
154 of this Charter, unless such vacancy occurs within one year of the next
general election at which the office of mayor would normally be filled, in
which case the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority or the
members or the city council then in office. A person elected or appointed to
fill a vacancy in the office of mayor shall hold office for the unexpired term
of the former incumbent.
Article V. City Manager
§ 60   City Manager-Appointment, qualifications and removal.
   There shall be a city manager who shall be appointed by the city council.
The city manager shall be selected solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications. The city manager shall be appointed by and shall
serve at the pleasure of the city council.
§ 61   Functions.
   The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall
be responsible for the effective administration of the city government. The
city manager shall have the power and it shall be the city manager's duty:
   (a)   To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced;
   (b)   To administer and exercise supervision and control over all offices,
departments and services of the city government under the jurisdiction and
control of the city manager;
   (c)   To act in an advisory capacity to the city council with respect to
officials not under the jurisdiction and control of the city manager;
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, to appoint all heads or
directors of departments of the city and all subordinate officers and employees
with power to discipline and remove any officer or employee so appointed,
subject to the civil service provisions of this Charter; provided, further,
that all officers and employees of the city appointed by the city manager who
are exempt from the rules and regulations of the civil service board pursuant
to Charter Section
83 may be suspended or removed at the pleasure of the city manager.
   (e)   To make such recommendations to the mayor and city council as the city
manager shall deem appropriate concerning the operation, affairs and future
needs of the city;
   (f)   To attend all regular and special public meetings of the city council
with the right to participate in the discussion of matters pending before the
council but without the right to vote on such matters;
   (g)   To see that all terms or conditions imposed in favor of the city or
the people of the city in any contract franchise, lease or permit are
faithfully kept and performed; and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to
notify the city council of such violation;
   (h)   When authorized to do so by the provisions of this Charter or by
ordinance or resolution, to execute, on behalf of the city all contracts,
franchises, lease or permits or any other document requiring the execution of
which is required by an officer of the city;
   (i)   To keep the city council fully advised as to the operations, financial
conditions and needs of the city;
   (j)   To prepare the annual budget in accordance with Charter Section
111.
   (k)   To perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be
prescribed by the city council.
§ 62   Non-interference with City Manager.
   No member of the city council shall directly or indirectly coerce or attempt
to coerce the city manager relative to the appointment or removal of any city
officer or employee which is made by the city manager, but prior to the making
of any appointment or removal of any head or director of any department or
division of the city, the city manager shall endeavor to advise the city
council of his intention to do so.
   The city council and its members shall deal solely and directly through the
city manager with respect to the part of city government under the direction
and supervision of the city manager; provided, that nothing herein shall limit
the power of the city council, or members thereof, to do the following:
   (a)   to conduct investigations as provided in Section
34 of this Charter, or
   (b)   to contact officers and employees of the city for the purpose of
inquiry or obtaining information that is a public record, or
   (c)   to contact officers and employees designated by the city manager for
the purpose of advising said officers and employees or citizen complaints
relating to the operation of city government.
§ 63   Removal of City Manager
   The city manager cannot be removed from office except by a vote of six
members of the city council. The city manager shall not be subject to removal
from office within twelve months of the date that the city manager first
assumes the duties of office except for incompetence, malfeasance, misfeasance
or neglect of duty. If the removal is proposed within the first twelve months,
the city manager may demand written charges and a public hearing before the
city council prior to the date upon which his removal becomes effective; but
the decision of the city council shall be final, conclusive and binding upon
the city manager, and pending such hearing the council may suspend the city
manager from duty without loss of normal compensation.
Article VI. Other Appointive Officers
§ 70   Appointive officers.
   The following other city officers shall be appointed by the city council:
   (a)   City Clerk;
   (b)   City Attorney;
   (c)   City Treasurer;
   (d)   City Auditor; and
   (e)   Such other officers and employees of its own body as it deems
necessary. (Amended by Res. 2018-0317, 7/31/18)
§ 71   City Clerk.
   The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall have custody of and
shall be responsible for the official seal and records of the city. The city
clerk shall act as secretary of the city council and all other boards,
commissions and agencies of the city. The city council shall prescribe the
qualifications additional duties and compensation of the city clerk. The city
clerk shall appoint subject to the civil service provisions of this Charter,
such deputies and employees as the council may by resolution prescribe.
§ 72   City Attorney.
   The city council shall appoint a city attorney and shall prescribe the
qualifications, duties and compensation of such officer. The city attorney
shall serve as legal counsel to the city government and all officers,
departments, boards, commissions and agencies thereof and shall have such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed by state law and by ordinance or
resolution of the city council. In situations where the city attorney
determines there is a conflict in representation by that office, the city
council may authorize the retention or other legal counsel to represent one of
the conflicting parties. The city attorney shall appoint all other members of
the city attorney's office.
§ 73   City Treasurer.
   The city treasurer shall be responsible for the deposit and investment of
all funds of the city treasury not made subject to the control of others
pursuant to this Charter. The city treasurer shall keep the city council fully
advised as to the deposit and investment of funds subject to his control. The
city council shall prescribe the qualifications, additional duties, and
compensation of the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall appoint, subject
to the civil service provisions of this Charter, such deputies and employees as
the council may by resolution prescribe.
§ 74   Mayor's staff.
   The mayor shall appoint such members of the mayor's staff, exempt from the
civil service system, as may be provided by resolution. The compensation paid
to such staff members shall be fixed by resolution of the council. The mayor's
staff shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor.
§ 75   Method of suspension and removal of appointive officers and employees.
   Every appointive officer appointed by the city council as provided in
Section 70 of this article may be suspended or removed at the pleasure of the
city council.
§ 76   Duty to inform council.
   Each appointive officer specified in Section 70 shall have the duty to
promptly and fully inform the city council of any act of misfeasance or
malfeasance known to said appointive officer to have been committed by any
officer or employee of the city if such act might significantly and adversely
affect the finances or operations of the city. The city council, by ordinance
or resolution, may further define the procedures and provisions determined to
be necessary to implement and operate under this section.
§ 77   City Auditor.
   (a)   The city council shall appoint a city auditor and shall prescribe the
qualifications, duties, and compensation of such officer. The city auditor
shall independently assess and report on city operations and services; shall
assist the council in the conduct of budgetary inquiries and in the making of
budgetary decisions; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
prescribed by state law and by ordinance or resolution of the city council. The
city auditor shall appoint all other members of the city auditor's office.
   (b)   The city auditor shall discharge the duties of the office as
prescribed by ordinance enacted by the city council. (Adopted by Res. 2018-
0317, 7/31/18)
Article VII. Civil Service
§ 80   Creation of board.
   The civil service board shall consist of five citizens of the city who shall
have no connection with city government. The city council shall appoint said
board members for five year terms. Board members in office on the effective
date of this section shall continue in office during their unexpired terms
unless removed as provided by law. Vacancies on the civil service board from
whatever cause shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term.
§ 81   Secretary.
   The city manager shall appoint a director of personnel who shall serve as
secretary of the civil service board. The director of personnel shall act as
chief examiner and supervise all examinations, subject to the direction of the
board. The director of personnel shall also perform such other duties as are
prescribed by this Charter, by the city manager, by the civil service board or
by ordinance or resolution of the city council.
§ 82   Power to administer oaths.
   The secretary of the civil service board and such other employees in the
civil service office authorized by the board by order duly entered in the
minutes shall have the power and authority to take affidavits and administer
oaths in all matters relating to civil service.
§ 83   Exemptions and classified service.
   The officers and employees of the city who shall be exempt from the rules
and regulations of the civil service board shall include:
   (a)   Officers directly elected by the people;
   (b)   Members of advisory boards and commissions;
   (c)   The city manager, and any person or persons employed as assistant city
manager, and confidential secretary;
   (d)   Those officials of the city government responsible for the operation
of a city department or division, along with those persons who may be employed
as assistants to such officials; and
   (e)   Those employees occupying positions in classes which are filled only
on a part-time, seasonal, or limited term basis.
   The city council shall, by resolution, designate those classes of positions,
employees in which shall be considered exempt from the rules and regulations of
the civil service board, in accordance with the intent and meaning of this
section.
§ 84   Examinations.
   For the purpose of establishing eligible registers from which positions in
the classified service shall be filled, it shall be the duty of the civil
service board to conduct competitive examinations open to all persons who
lawfully may be appointed to any position within the class for which such
examinations are held, and who meet the minimum qualifications requisite to the
performance of the duties of such position as established by the civil service
board.
   Positions in the higher classes shall be filled, as far as is practicable
and consistent with the best interests of the service, by promotion following
competitive tests of employees in lower classes holding permanent civil service
status. The civil service board, shall, by rule, establish regulations for
promotional eligibility, except that in the police and fire departments, all
higher uniform positions in the classified service shall be filled from
eligible registers established as a result of promotional examination only, and
no such member shall be eligible for promotion to a higher class until that
person has served at least three (3) years in such department and that in
subsequent promotions the member must have held the rank from which that person
is promoted for at least two (2) years.
   For the filling of one vacancy, the appointment shall be made from among the
eligible persons whose scores, at the time of certification, represent the
three highest whole percentage score ranks on the list. For the purpose of
ranking, scores of eligibles on an eligible list shall be rounded to the next
highest whole percent and a rank shall consist of one or more eligibles with
the same score. However, in the case of an appointment from an eligible list
resulting from a promotional examination, the appointment shall be made from
the three candidates standing highest on the list. (Adopted November 6, 1990)
§ 85   Veterans' Preference.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of Paragraph (b) of this section, in all
tests and examinations held by the civil service commission pursuant to the
provisions of this Charter, any person who at the time of taking such test or
examination has served in the armed forces of the United States in time of war
and who received an honorable discharge therefrom or who after such service to
the United States in time of war, has continued in such service or who has been
released from active duty because of disability resulting from such service in
time of peace or under other honorable conditions, as such persons are defined
by state law in effect at that time and who has attained a percentage
qualifying such applicant for any position under civil service regulations,
shall be allowed an increase of ten points above the credit such applicant has
attained in such examination.
   (b)   (1)   Any person who has previously received a veteran's preference on
an examination for federal employment, or for employment with any public agency
in California, and who, by virtue of the preference was certified and
subsequently appointed to a position with the federal government or any public
agency in California, shall not be entitled to a preference under this section.
      (2)   No preference shall be granted under this section to any veteran
who was discharged more than ten years prior to the final filing date stated on
the examination announcement, or prior to the date on which an eligible list is
established if no final filing date is stated on the announcement; provided,
however, that veterans who are declared by the United States Veterans
Administration to have a service connected disability of 30% or more at the
time of taking such test or examination, it otherwise qualified for the
preference provided for by subsection (a). shall be entitled to such preference
without limitation as to the time during which such preference may be used.
      (3)   No preference shall be granted under this section to any person who
retired from the armed forces at or above the rank of major, or its equivalent.
      (4)   The preference granted under this section shall not apply to
promotions, or to promotional examinations (Adopted November 4, 1980)
§ 86   Record of efficiency.
   Success in similar positions in the employ of the city shall be considered
in estimating the standing of a candidate and to that end the board shall,
wherever feasible, cause to be kept a record of efficiency of all city
employees.
§ 87   Discriminations.
   No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be
appointed, promoted, demoted or discharged or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because
of race, color or religious belief.
§ 88   Employee development programs.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the civil service board
may provide for the establishment of programs, including trainee programs,
designed to attract and utilize persons with minimal qualifications, but with
the potential for development, in order to provide career development
opportunities for such persons, including but not limited to members of
disadvantaged groups, handicapped persons, and veterans entitled to preference
under Section 85 of this article. Such programs may provide for probationary
and permanent appointment to the classified service upon the satisfactory
completion of the training period prescribed by the civil service board. The
civil service board shall provide for the establishment of such programs when
requested to do so by the city council.
§ 89   Probations.
   Appointment or promotion to office or employment in the classified service
shall not be deemed complete until a period of probation has elapsed. The civil
service board shall by rule establish a probationary period for each class in
the classified service. A probationer may be discharged or reduced at any time
within the probationary period and thereupon shall have no right to appeal
under Section
92 of this Charter.
§ 90   Right of appeal.
   If discharged after the expiration of said period, the employee so
discharged may appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section
92 of this Charter.
§ 91   Disciplinary power.
   The city manager or other official or board in whom is vested disciplinary
or removal power shall be allowed full freedom in his or its action on such
matters, it being the intent and spirit of this article to provide a fair and
honest approach to municipal employment for every inhabitant or the city, but
in no sense to handicap or curtail the responsible administrative officer in
securing efficient service.
§ 92   Power and duties of the civil service board.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the civil service board to:
      (1)   Adopt and maintain the classification plan. The classification plan
shall consist of classes of positions in the classified service defined by
class specifications, including title, a description of duties and
responsibilities and a statement of employment standards to be required of
applicants for employment in each class. From time to time as it deems
necessary, the board may establish additional classes and divide, combine,
alter or abolish existing classes. Each position in the classified service
shall be allocated by the director of personnel to one or the classes
established by the plan; provided, that whenever a new or additional position
is authorized by the city manager, the director of personnel shall allocate
each proposed position to an appropriate existing class or recommend the
creation of new class to the civil service board.
   When action is taken by the board to establish additional classes or to
divide, combine, alter or abolish existing classes, or upon the reallocation or
positions by the director or personnel, the civil service board shall determine
the manner in which the incumbents or positions affected shall attain status.
      (2)   Formulate rules and regulations covering the examination of
applicants for positions in the classified service and the promotion or
employees in the classified service, including rules for preparation of
examination announcement notices, accepting applications, administering
examinations, eligibility for promotion, seniority credits, establishing
eligible registers and reinstatement lists, certification, appointment,
probationary period, and any other matter necessary to the recruitment and
selection of employees.
      (3)   Hear appeals, upon written request from any employee in any city
department in the classified service, who may be suspended without pay,
demoted, dismissed, or otherwise disciplined by the appointing authority. The
board shall define the manner, time, and place by which such appeal shall be
heard and the judgment of the board shall be final.
      (4)   Hear appeals, upon written request, from any employee in any city
department in the classified service, with reference to the allocation or
reallocation of his position by the director of personnel.
      (5)   Provide, by rule, for the interpretation and administration of
ordinances affecting personnel, when specifically directed to do so by the city
council and to provide, by rule, for the regulation of any other matter
pertaining to personnel administration not in contradiction with the provisions
of this section.
   (b)   The board, subject to budgetary approval of the city council, may
employ or contract for hearing officers to hear appeals of the actions
specified in Paragraphs (3) and (4) of Subsection (a) of this section and to
prepare recommendations for the board. The board may adopt rules and
regulations to implement this subsection.
§ 93   Employment as a result of annexation.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, in the event that the
service area of the City is increased by reason of a consolidation, merger,
incorporation, annexation or contract, the city council may, by resolution,
provide that some or all employees or special districts encompassed by the
increased service area shall be deemed regular employees of the City of
Sacramento, to serve for such limited periods of time as the city council
determines appropriate under the circumstances. The city council shall have the
power to impose such conditions prior to employment as it deems necessary,
including but not limited to, passage by the district employees of a physical
examination to be administered by the city. The city council shall also by
resolution or ordinance determine the terms and conditions of employment of
such persons, including but not limited to probationary period, salary,
seniority, retirement status, departmental and classification assignment,
benefits, credits for accumulated special district benefits, bargaining unit
status, and all other matters related to their employment. (Adopted November 2,
1982)
Article VIII. Certain Departmental and Personnel Provisions
§ 95   Organization of fire department.
   The fire department shall consist of a chief of the department and such
other employees as the city council may from time to time prescribe.
§ 96   Powers and duties of the fire chief.
   The fire chief shall have control, management and direction of all members
of the fire department in the lawful exercise of the chief's functions with
full power to detail any of the members to such public service as the chief may
direct. The chief shall recommend to the city manager members of the force for
demotion or dismissal and can suspend and prefer charges against any officer or
member.
§ 97   Vacancies above the grade of firefighter.
   When a vacancy arises in the fire department above the grade of firefighter,
the chief of the fire department may, with the approval of the city manager,
assign a member of the department from the next lower rank to fill the position
until such time as the absent member shall return or the vacancy be filled by
appointment. The member so assigned shall, during the member's incumbency
receive the salary attached to the position thus temporarily held.
§ 98   Firefighters.
   No member of the fire department shall be allowed, without the consent of
the city council, to receive any money, gratuity or compensation for any
service rendered as a firefighter.
   The members of the fire department shall not engage in any other employment,
work, profession, business or enterprise that is inconsistent, incompatible, in
conflict with, or adversely affects the performance of their duties as
firefighters, or that is inimical to the most effective performance of the
mission of the Sacramento Fire Department or the best interests of the city.
   The city council shall have the exclusive and non-delegable authority and
duty to define, interpret and implement the terms of this section by resolution
and such definition and interpretation shall be final and conclusive. The
process and procedure followed by the city council in so defining, interpreting
and implementing this section shall be by unilateral legislative action not
subject to and expressly excluded from any meeting and conferring procedure
with employee organizational representatives that is or may be provided for
under any other law. In the event a court or administrative body of competent
jurisdiction renders a final judgment or order invalidating this paragraph or
any part thereof then the terms and provisions of this section as herein above
provided shall be null and void and this section shall thereupon on the
effective date of such final judgement or order and thereafter read as follows:
   No member of the fire department shall be allowed, without the consent of
the city council, to receive any money, gratuity or compensation for any
service rendered as a firefighter. The members of the fire department shall not
follow any other profession, calling or business, but shall devote their entire
time to the performance of their duties, nor shall they be allowed pay for any
period during which they shall absent themselves from public duty, except as in
this Charter provided.
§ 99   Organization of police department.
   The police department shall consist of a chief or police, a police force and
all such other officers, clerks, employees and attaches as the city council may
from time to time prescribe.
§ 100   Powers and duties of the chief of police.
   The chief of police shall have control, management and direction of all
members of the police department in the lawful exercise of the chief's
functions with full power to detail any of the members to such public service
as the chief may direct. The chief shall recommend to the city manager members
of the force for demotion or dismissal and can suspend and prefer charges
against any officer or member.
§ 101   Vacancies above the grade of police officer.
   When a vacancy arises in the police department above the grade of police
officer, the chief of the police department may, with the approval of the city
manager, assign a member of the department from the next lower rank to fill the
position until such time as the absent member shall return or the vacancy be
filled by appointment. The member so assigned shall, during the member's
incumbency, receive the salary attached to the position thus temporarily held.
§ 102   Police officers.
   It shall be the duty of each member of the police force to be acquainted
with the provisions of this Charter, with all ordinances of the city and with
all laws of the state defining public offenses and regulating criminal
proceedings.
   No member of the police force shall be allowed to receive, without the
consent of the city council, any money, gratuity or compensation for any
service rendered as an officer.
   The members of the police force shall not engage in any other employment,
work, profession, business or enterprise that is inconsistent, incompatible, in
conflict with or adversely affects the performance of their duties as police
officers, or that is inimical to the most effective performance of the mission
of the Sacramento Police Department or the best interests of the city.
   The city council shall have the exclusive and non-delegable authority and
duty to define, interpret and implement the terms of this section by resolution
and such definition and interpretation shall be final and conclusive. The
process and procedure followed by the city council in so defining, interpreting
and implementing this section shall be by unilateral legislative action not
subject to and expressly excluded from any meeting and conferring procedure
with employee organizational representatives that is or may be provided for
under other law. In the event a court or administrative body of competent
jurisdiction renders a final judgment or order invalidating this paragraph or
any part thereof then the terms and provisions of this section as herein above
provided shall be null and void and this section shall thereupon on the
effective date of such final judgment or order and thereafter read as follows:
   No member of the police force shall be allowed to receive, without the
consent of the city council, any money, gratuity or compensation for any
service rendered as an officer except rewards which have been publicly offered
for the apprehension and conviction of criminals. The members of the police
force shall not follow any other profession, calling or business, but shall
devote their entire time to the performance of their official duties, nor shall
they be allowed pay for any period during which they shall absent themselves
from public duty, except as in this Charter provided. It shall be the duty of
each member or the police force to become acquainted with the provisions of
this Charter, with all ordinances of the city and with all laws of the state
defining public offenses and regulating criminal proceedings.
§ 103   Salaries of employees.
   The annual compensation or the employees of the city shall be fixed by
resolution of the city council. All salaries shall be paid not less frequently
than semimonthly and shall be in full compensation for all duties and services
performed by such employees of the city.
§ 104   Number of employees.
   The city council by resolution shall fix the number of employees to be
employed, from time to time, in the offices, departments and divisions of the
city.
§ 105   Rewards.
   The city council may, on notice from the city manager, reward any city
employee for conduct which is heroic or meritorious. The form or amount of such
reward shall be discretionary with the city council, but shall not exceed in
any one instance one month's salary.
§ 106   Vacancies in certain cases.
   If any employee of the city shall be convicted of a felony or malfeasance in
office or be absent for one month from the city without leave, that office
shall immediately become vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as in this
Charter provided.
§ 107   Vacations.
   All employees of the City of Sacramento shall be entitled to vacation
allowances on the following basis:
   (a)   During the first calendar year of employment, and after the completion
of at least six (6) months of service, employees shall be entitled to a
vacation allowance on a pro-rata basis of ten (10) working days per year for
the number of months worked prior to the beginning of the first calendar year.
   (b)   Upon the completion of one calendar year and continuing thereafter
through the fifth calendar year of employment, all employees shall be entitled
to a vacation allowance of ten (10) working days per year.
   (c)   Upon the completion of five calendar years and continuing thereafter
through the fifteenth calendar year of employment, all employees shall be
entitled to a vacation allowance of fifteen (15) working days per year.
   (d)   Upon the completion of fifteen calendar years of employment and
continuing thereafter, all employees shall be entitled to a vacational
allowance of twenty (20) working days per year; provided further, that such
employees so qualified to receive twenty (20) working days of yearly vacation
allowance shall have the option, to be exercised not later than the first day
of December in each year, to receive pro-rata payment for five (5) days of such
vacation in lieu of using such five (5) days for vacation purposes.
   For the purpose of this section, the first calendar year shall be considered
to be the period between January 1 and December 31 next following the
employee's original date of appointment. For the purpose of computing vacation
time, each employee shall be considered to work not more than five (5) days
each week. Vacation time shall not be earned when an employee is absent from
duty without pay, except that there shall be no reduction in the yearly
vacation allowance if such time absent from duty without pay does not exceed
ten (10) days per year.
   Upon termination of employment for any reason, after completion of at least
six (6) months of service, an employee entitled to receive vacation allowance
shall be paid in a lump sum for all unused accumulated vacation time. All
vacation shall be taken at such time as the executive head of the department in
which such officer or employee may be serving shall direct.
   Any city employee in the Reserve Corps, Naval Reserve, Marine Corps, or
National Guard of the United States Army and Navy, when called for the annual
period of intensive training, shall be permitted to participate therein and
shall not suffer loss of pay through such absence nor shall such period devoted
to said training be construed as the annual vacation of such employee but said
employee shall have in addition thereto, the usual vacation period or pay
allotted to city employees.
   The civil service board shall by rule define and interpret the terms of this
section and such definition and interpretation shall be conclusive; shall by
rule provide for the regulation and accumulation of vacations; shall by rule
define those categories of temporary employment in which employees shall not be
entitled to earn vacation allowance; and shall by rule provide for the method
of computation of accumulated or unused vacation allowance for employees
leaving city service.
§ 108   Longevity pay.
   All regular full-time employees of the City of Sacramento, meeting such
requirements as may be established by the city council to carry out the
provisions of this section, shall be entitled to receive longevity pay on the
following basis:
   (a)   Upon completion of twenty (20) years of service, an employee shall
receive yearly thereafter a lump sum of $100 in addition to said employee's
regular compensation; said amount to be paid during the month of July of each
year next succeeding the completion of said twenty (20) years of service; and
   (b)   Upon completion of twenty-five (25) years of service, an employee
shall receive yearly thereafter a lump sum of $200 in addition to said
employee's regular compensation and in addition to the longevity allowance
described in paragraph (a) preceding, said amount to be paid during the month
of July of each year next succeeding the completion of said twenty-five (25)
years of service.
   No deductions for retirement system contributions shall be made from any
amount paid to an employee for longevity, and such longevity pay shall be
excluded from an employee's earnings when computing retirement allowances.
   The city council shall, by ordinance, adopt rules and regulations for
employee eligibility and administration of the provisions of this section.
§ 109   Employee defined.
   As used in this article, the term "employee" shall include any officer of
the city other than the mayor, members of the council and appointive members of
city boards and commissions.
Article IX. Fiscal Administration
§ 110   Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year for the city shall be determined by ordinance enacted by the
city council.
§ 111   Budget.
   Each department, office and agency of the city shall provide in the form and
at the time directed by the city manager all information required by the city
manager to develop a budget conforming to modern budget practices and
procedures as well as specific information which may be prescribed by the
council. Not later than 60 days prior to the commencement of each fiscal year
or such greater period as the council may prescribe, the city manager shall
prepare and present to the city council, in such form and manner as it may
prescribe, budget recommendations for the next succeeding fiscal year.
Following public budget hearing, the city council shall adopt by resolution a
budget of proposed expenditures and appropriations necessary therefore for the
ensuing year, failing which the appropriations for current operations of the
last fiscal year shall be deemed effective until the new budget and
appropriation measures are adopted. The budget may be amended during the fiscal
year in accordance with the procedure established by the council.
§ 112   Levy of property tax.
   Not later than the date set by state law for this purpose, the city council
shall by resolution fix the rate of property tax to be levied and levy the tax
upon all taxable property in the city. Such rate shall be adequate to meet all
obligations of the city for the fiscal year, taking into account estimated
revenue from all other sources. Should the city council fail to fix the rate
and levy taxes within the time prescribed the rate for the last preceding
fiscal year shall thereupon be automatically effective, and a tax at such rate
shall be levied upon all taxable property in the city for the current fiscal
year.
§ 113   Cash pool operations.
   Municipal obligations may be financed by cash pool operations and
utilization of a warrant or check system. Except for those funds restricted by
bond indentures, state or federal law, other sections of this Charter or
specific conditions of the legislation creating them, temporary transfers
between funds are permitted.
§ 114   Funds.
   The city council shall create, reduce or eliminate such funds as are
required for proper accounting and fiscal management, or required as a
condition of receiving funds from any other government, or to fulfill any
bonded or other contractual obligation of the city.
§ 115   Accounting system.
   The city manager shall establish and maintain a system of financial
procedures, accounts and controls for the city government and each of its
departments, offices and agencies which shall conform to generally accepted
principles of accounting which shall be adequate to account for all monies on
hand and for all income and expenditures in such detail as will provide
complete and informative data concerning the financial affairs of the city and
as will be readily susceptible to audit and review.
§ 116   Receipts and expenditures.
   All monies received by the city shall be deposited in the city treasury, and
no monies shall be disbursed from the treasury without the approval of the city
manager or of another officer duly authorized by him. No expenditure of city
funds shall be made except for the purposes and in the manner specified by an
appropriation of the city council; nor shall any disbursement be made unless
obligations are properly supported by accounting evidence, sufficient money is
available in the city treasury and there is an adequate unencumbered
appropriation balance in the proper account classification.
§ 117   Annual audit.
   The city manager upon approval of the city council shall engage each year an
independent certified public accountant who shall examine and report to the
council on the annual financial statement of the city. The accountant shall
have free access to the books, records, inventories and reports of all officers
and employees who receive, handle or disburse public funds, and of such other
officers, employees, or departments as the city council may direct. The
accountant shall submit an audit as soon as practicable after the closing of
the books for the fiscal year for which he is engaged. Copies of such audit
reports shall be filed with the city council, and shall be available for public
inspection and review.
§ 118   Official bonds.
   The city council shall determine by ordinance which officers and employees
shall be subject to group or individual bonds to insure the faithful
performance of official duties, shall fix the amount of such bonds and shall
provide payment of the premium of such bonds by the city.
§ 119   Revenue bonds.
   The city council may issue revenue bonds for any lawful purpose in such
manner and upon such terms and conditions as it may fix and establish by the
provisions of a procedural ordinance.
§ 120   Sacramento Children's Fund.
   (a)   Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section:
      (1)   "Administrative costs" means the City of Sacramento's costs for
strategic planning, grant making, grants management, data collection and
evaluation, technical assistance, organizational capacity-building,
communications, community engagement, and service performance and impact
evaluation.
      (2)   "Baseline funding" means the amount of general fund revenue
expended in the 2022-2023 fiscal year on baseline services, as calculated and
annually adjusted pursuant to subsection (e).
      (3)   "Baseline services" means services provided to youth that are
designed to meet the same objectives as the fund goals (as defined herein), but
excluding any amounts that would be considered prohibited expenditures under
subsection (d)(2).
      (4)   "Budget" means the city's fiscal year budget adopted by the city
council pursuant to section 111.
      (5)   "Cannabis business operations tax" or "CBOT" means the tax imposed
by Sacramento City Code section
3.08.205, as amended from time to time, or any successor tax on cannabis
businesses.
      (6)   "Commission" means the Sacramento Children's Fund Planning and
Oversight Commission.
      (7)   "Estimated CBOT" means the amount of cannabis business operations
tax revenue in the next fiscal year, as estimated by the city manager no later
than January 15 immediately preceding the next fiscal year.
      (8)   "Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan" means the plan developed by
the Sacramento Children's Fund Planning and Oversight Commission and approved
by the city council, as provided in this section.
      (9)   "Fund goals" means the following: supporting the mental health and
emotional wellness of youth; preventing and reducing homelessness among youth,
including youth transitioning out of foster care; preventing and reducing youth
substance abuse; preventing and reducing youth violence; and supporting the
healthy development of children ages 0 to 5 years old.
      (10)   "General fund" means all revenue received by the city that is
unrestricted and that can be used for any lawful purpose.
      (11)   "Operational department" means an office or department of the city
funded primarily from general fund revenue.
      (12)   "Qualified organization" means a public entity (including the city
through its offices and departments) or any organization exempt from taxation
under United States Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3).
      (13)   "Sacramento Youth Commission" means the commission established
pursuant to Sacramento City Code chapter
2.126 or any successor commission.
      (14)   "Sacramento Children's Fund" means the fund that receives the
general fund revenue allocation required by subsection (c), and that is
maintained and accounted for separately and apart from the remainder of the
general fund.
      (15)   "Youth" means persons under 25 years of age.
      (16)   "Youth services" means qualified-organization-provided services
and programs that support and implement the Five-Year Strategic Investment
Plan. Youth services may include, but are not limited to:
         (A)   Mental health counseling and wellness services;
         (B)   Substance abuse prevention services;
         (C)   Street outreach, violence intervention, and case management;
         (D)   Youth workforce development, including career pathways that
advance the city's climate-action goals;
         (E)   Summer programs and after-school programs; and
         (F)   Early childhood education and family support services.
   (b)   Sacramento Children's Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby established a fund to be known as the Sacramento
Children's Fund, which shall be maintained and accounted for separately and
apart from the remainder of the general fund.
      (2)   The Sacramento Children's Fund shall consist of:
         (A)   The annual allocation from the general fund required by
subsection (c);
         (B)   All interest earned on the Sacramento Children's Fund;
         (C)   All amounts in the Sacramento Children's Fund not spent or
encumbered at the end of a fiscal year, which amounts shall carry over to the
next fiscal year as a supplement to the amount required to be allocated in that
next fiscal year; and
         (D)   Any other money specifically directed to the Sacramento
Children's Fund, from sources such as grants, gifts, and council-approved
additional allocations.
   (c)   Annual funding required; calculation; adjustments
      (1)   Each budget adopted after the effective date of this section must
allocate an amount equal to at least 40% of the estimated CBOT, as adjusted
according to subsection (c)(2), to the Sacramento Children's Fund.
      (2)   Starting in 2025, by each January 15 the city auditor shall publish
an audited amount of CBOT for the prior fiscal year. If 40% of that audited
amount is greater than the amount allocated to the Sacramento Children's Fund
in the prior fiscal year, the difference shall be added to the amount required
to be allocated the next fiscal year. If 40% of the audited amount is less than
the amount allocated to the Sacramento Children's Fund in the prior fiscal
year, the difference shall be deducted from the amount required to be allocated
the next fiscal year.
   (d)   Expenditures.
      (1)   Money in the Sacramento Children's Fund may only be used to engage
qualified organizations to provide youth services in accordance with an adopted
Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan, plus allowable administrative costs.
         (A)   Notwithstanding the lack of a Five-Year Strategic Plan during
the 2023-2024 fiscal year, money in the Sacramento Children's Fund may be used
during the 2023-2024 fiscal year for administrative costs.
      (2)   Prohibited expenditures. Sacramento Children's Fund money may not
be spent for:
         (A)   Services that only incidentally benefit youth;
         (B)   Acquisition, lease, or maintenance of any capital item or real
property that is not for primary and direct use by youth; or
         (C)   Services for which a fixed or minimum level of expenditure is
mandated by state or federal law, to the extent of that fixed or minimum level
of expenditure.
      (3)   Recipient organizations.
         (A)   The city shall select qualified organizations to receive
Sacramento Children's Fund money based on an open, transparent, and competitive
process, as may be established by the city.
         (B)   All qualified organizations receiving money under this section
are subject to, and shall cooperate in, performance and financial audits by the
city and its representatives.
         (C)   Before receiving money from the Sacramento Children's Fund, any
non-city public agency must demonstrate a cash match for each dollar it
receives from the fund.
      (4)   Administrative costs.
         (A)   For fiscal year 2023-2024, no more than 20% of the Sacramento
Children's Fund may be spent on administrative costs.
         (B)   For fiscal year 2024-2025, no more than 15% of the Sacramento
Children's Fund may be spent on administrative costs.
         (C)   Beginning with fiscal year 2025-2026, no more than 10% of the
Sacramento Children's Fund may be spent on administrative costs.
   (e)   Maintenance of effort.
      (1)   The Sacramento Children's Fund does not supplant baseline funding.
In addition to the annual allocation required by subsection (c), the budget
must include the baseline funding amount for baseline services, subject to this
subsection (e).
         (A)   The city auditor shall calculate and publish the baseline
funding amount no later than December 31, 2023.
         (B)   Recognizing that the baseline funding amount will not be
calculated before adoption of the budget for fiscal year 2023- 2024, that
budget need not expressly comply with this subsection (e)(1). However, if the
auditor's verification pursuant to subsection (e)(1)(C) establishes the fiscal
year 2023-2024 expenditures on baseline services fell below the baseline
funding amount, the difference shall be added to the fiscal year 2025-2026
budget as a one-time addition to fund baseline services, as provided in
subsection (e)(1)(C).
         (C)   Beginning in 2025, by January 15 of each year the city auditor
shall verify that the baseline funding amount was expended in the previous
fiscal year. If in any year the auditor determines expenditures for baseline
services fell below the baseline funding amount, the difference between amount
expended and the baseline funding amount shall be added to the succeeding
fiscal year budget as a one-time addition to fund baseline services.
      (2)   The baseline funding amount may be reduced in any year during which
general fund revenue support for operational departments is reduced; provided,
however, the percentage reduction in baseline funding cannot exceed the
percentage reduction of general fund revenue support to operational
departments.
      (3)   Following any reduction pursuant to subsection (e)(2) above, in
subsequent years during which there are increases in general fund revenue
support to operational departments, the reduced baseline funding amount must
receive the same percentage increase as the percentage increase of general fund
revenue support to operational departments, until such time as the baseline
funding amount returns to the amount described in subsection (e)(1).
   (f)   Planning and Oversight Commission.
      (1)   There is hereby established a ninemember Sacramento Children's Fund
Planning and Oversight Commission.
      (2)   The commission has the power and duty to:
         (A)   In consultation with the Sacramento Youth Commission, develop
Five-Year Strategic Investment Plans and submit them to the city council for
adoption;
         (B)   Conduct a review of each Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan
before the end of the third year of that plan;
         (C)   Review and accept annual Service Performance Reports, Three-Year
Youth Impact Evaluation Reports, Five-Year Youth Impact Performance Reports,
and fiscal and performance audit reports; and
         (D)   Make recommendations to the city council as a result of its
review of the plans and reports described in subsections (f)(2)(B), (C).
      (3)   Appointment; qualifications.
         (A)   Notwithstanding section
230 of this charter, each member of the city council (including the mayor)
shall appoint one member to the commission. In making these appointments, the
members of the city council shall endeavor to constitute a commission that
reflects the demographic profile of the city's youth.
         (B)   Each commission member must have:
            (i)   Personal experience as a consumer (past or present) of youth
services; or
            (ii)   Demonstrated knowledge and professional experience in youth
development theory, youth program implementation, or youth program evaluation.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the commission and
commissioners shall be subject to the same rules and regulations as other city
boards and commissions.
      (5)   The city manager shall assign sufficient staff to support the
commission in the discharge of its duties, including the preparation of plans
and reports.
   (g)   Plans and Reports.
      (1)   Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan.
         (A)   The commission shall develop and submit to the city council for
final adoption Five-Year Strategic Investment Plans, which may be amended from
time to time.
         (B)   The first Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan covers the period
of July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2029; subsequent plans cover succeeding five-
year periods.
         (C)   Contents. Each Five-Year Strategic Investment Plan must include
the following:
            (i)   Problems and challenges to be addressed in each of the fund
goals;
            (ii)   Target populations to be served within each of the fund
goals, using multiple data sources to identify those populations most impacted
by poverty, trauma, and violence;
            (iii)   Service performance measures and youth outcome metrics to
evaluate progress toward achieving the fund goals;
            (iv)   Strategies to achieve outcomes for the target populations
for each of the fund goals;
            (v)   Alignment, leveraging, and coordination of other public and
private resources, including resources of the County of Sacramento, local
school districts, and philanthropy, to maximize program performance and impact
beyond what Sacramento Children's Fund monies can achieve alone.
      (2)   Annual Service Performance Reports. The city manager shall develop
for the commission's review an annual report evaluating all services funded by
the Sacramento Children's Fund, assessing those services' performance and
progress toward youth outcome metrics established in the Five-Year Strategic
Investment Plan.
      (3)   Youth Impact Evaluation Reports. After the third year of each Five-
Year Strategic Investment Plan, as well as after the end of each Five- Year
Strategic Investment Plan, the city manager shall develop for the commission's
review Youth Impact Evaluation Reports that assess progress in youth services
performance and youth outcome metrics.
   (h)   Implementation.
      (1)   The city council may adopt ordinances and resolutions to implement
this section, to the extent those are consistent with this section and
effectuate its purpose.
      (2)   If the Sacramento Youth Commission, including any successor, ceases
to exist, the city council shall identify another city board, commission, or
committee to perform the duties of the Sacramento Youth Commission under this
section. (Added by Res. 2022-0231, 7/21/22)
Article X. Elections
§ 150   Election code.
   The city council shall adopt an election code ordinance, providing an
adequate and complete procedure to govern city elections, including the
nomination of candidates for all elective offices. All elections provided for
by this Charter for choice of officers, shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed by said election code ordinance or as said code is hereafter
amended.
§ 151   Nominations.
   Nominations of candidates for all elective offices shall be made in the
manner prescribed by the election code ordinance.
§ 152   Elections.
   (a)   Commencing with the year 1992, the primary city election shall be held
on the same date in each election year as the California statewide direct
primary election, and the general city election shall be held on the same date
as the California statewide general election for that year. All other elections
shall be known as special elections.
   To implement this provision, primary and general elections for council
districts one, three, five and seven shall be held in the year 1994, and the
primary and general elections for council districts two, four, six and eight,
and for the office of mayor, shall be held in the year 1992.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, the term of office of
each person who is, on the effective date of this amendment, an incumbent of
the council seat for district two, four, six or eight, or of the office of
Mayor, and whose term of office would otherwise normally expire in 1991, shall
be extended until a successor is elected in 1992 and has been seated.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, the term of office of
each person who is, on the effective date of this amendment, an incumbent of
the council seat for district one, three, five or seven, and whose term of
office would otherwise normally expire in 1993, shall be extended until a
successor is elected in 1994 and has been seated. (Adopted October 10, 1989)
   (b)   At the primary election, there shall be chosen by the voters of each
council district with a council member whose term expires at the end of or
during the same year as the election, two candidates for the office of council
member from that district. When the term of office of mayor expires at the end
of or during the same year as the election, there shall be chosen by the voters
of the entire city at the primary election two candidates to fill the office of
mayor. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Charter to the contrary, in
the event that any candidate for nomination to the office of council member or
the mayor shall receive a majority of the votes cast for all the candidates for
nomination for such seat or office at such primary election, the candidate so
receiving such majority of all votes shall be deemed to be, and declared by the
city council to be, elected to such office.
   (c)   At the general election, the voters of each council district in which
a primary election was held shall select from among the two candidates chosen
at the primary election in each district one candidate to succeed to the office
of the council member whose term expires at the end of or during the same year
as the election.
§ 153   Taking office.
   All elected officials shall take office on the day of the last regularly
scheduled city council meeting in December in the year of their election, and
their terms of office shall commence on said date. (Adopted November 4, 1980;
amended by Res. 2016-0036, 2/9/16)
§ 154   Special elections to fill vacant offices.
   A special election to fill a vacancy in office of the mayor or council
member shall be called by the city council as soon as said vacancy occurs, but
in no event later than 14 days following the date upon which said vacancy
occurs.
   The special election to fill said vacant office shall be held on the next
regular election date following the date upon which said election is called at
which time permits said election to be lawfully held, or at an earlier date as
may be fixed by the city council. The candidate receiving the greatest vote in
said election shall be elected to fill said vacant office.
   As used in this section, the term "regular election date" means the primary
municipal election date for council elections and any election date specified
in Section 2500 of the Elections_Code of the State of California as the same
now reads or may be hereafter amended.
§ 155   Application of general law.
   Unless otherwise provided for by ordinances hereafter enacted, all elections
shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Elections_Code and
Government_Code of the State of California, as the same now exist or may be
hereafter amended, for the holding of elections in cities, insofar as the same
are not in conflict with this Charter.
Article XI. Initiative, Referendum, Recall
§ 160   General.
   The powers of the initiative, referendum and the recall of elected municipal
officers are hereby reserved to the electors of the city. The provisions of the
Elections_Code of the State of California, as the same now exist or may
hereafter be amended, governing the initiative and referendum and the recall of
municipal officers in cities shall be applicable insofar as the same are not in
conflict with this Charter; provided, however, that the number of signatures
which shall be required for the exercise of the power of initiative shall be as
provided in Section
161.
§ 161   Initiative.
   To initiate proceedings for the exercise of the power of the initiative
either of the following provisions shall apply as is applicable:
   (a)   If the petition is signed by duly qualified electors of the city equal
in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the registered voters of the
city, and contains a request that the proposed ordinance be submitted
immediately to a vote of the people at a special election, the city council
shall either adopt said ordinance within fifteen (15) days after it is
presented to the city council by the city clerk, or immediately call a special
election at which the ordinance, without alteration, shall be submitted to a
vote of the voters of the city.
   (b)   If the petition is signed by duly qualified electors of the city equal
in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the registered voters of the city,
and the ordinance petitioned for is not required by Subsection (a) to be, or
for any reason is not, submitted to the voters at a special election, and is
not adopted without alteration by the city council, then the proposed
ordinance, without alteration, shall be submitted by the city council to the
voters at the next primary or general municipal election at which said
proposition may appear regularly on the ballot or at the next statewide primary
or general election into which a special city election may be lawfully
consolidated, whichever is the first to occur.
   (c)   The total number of registered voters of the city shall be determined
according to the county clerk's last official report of registration to the
Secretary of State.
§ 162   Referendum.
   All ordinances which may be passed by the city council shall be subject to
referendum, whenever the use of the initiative or referendum is permitted by
state law applicable to cities.
§ 163   Recall.
   The holder of any elective office may be recalled, in the manner provided by
state law applicable to cities, by the electors after such person has held
office six months.
§ 164   Elections code.
   The city council may include procedural provisions in the elections code
ordinance consistent with this article.
Article XII. Redistricting.
§ 170   Sacramento Independent Redistricting Commission.
   (a)   The exclusive authority to redraw council district boundaries is
vested in the Sacramento Independent Redistricting Commission.
   (b)   The commission shall:
      (1)   Be independent of city council control;
      (2)   Conduct an open and transparent process enabling full public
consideration of and comment on the drawing of council district boundaries;
      (3)   Comply with the provisions in this article; and
      (4)   Conduct itself with integrity and fairness.
   (c)   The commission may:
      (1)   Adopt for itself rules of procedure not in conflict with this
article; and
      (2)   Adopt rules and regulations for the interpretation and
implementation of this article. (Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 171   Power and duty of Commission to adopt Council District Boundary Map.
   (a)   Within six months after census-block-level population data from a
regular United States decennial census is made available to the public, the
commission shall adopt a final map establishing new council district boundaries
and a final report explaining its decision. The final map shall include a
precise map and written description of the boundaries of each council district.
In the final report, the commission shall explain the rationale for the council
district boundaries, including, at a minimum, an explanation of how the final
map complies with the redistricting requirements and criteria in Section 175
and a reasonable justification for any council district boundary that does not
comply with any redistricting criterion.
   (b)   A commission-adopted final map has the force and effect of law. At the
first election after adoption of the final map, excluding a special election to
fill a vacancy or a recall election, councilmembers shall be elected for each
district under the final map that has the same district number as a district
whose incumbent's term is due to expire, unless on the date of adoption there
are less than six months until the next primary city election, in which case
the final map shall go into effect after that election and any applicable run-
off election.
   (c)   If the commission does not adopt a final map by the deadline in
subsection (a), the city attorney shall immediately petition the superior court
for an order prescribing new council district boundaries in accordance with the
redistricting criteria and requirements set forth in Section 175. The
boundaries prescribed by the superior court shall be used for all city council
elections that take place more than six months from the date of the superior
court's order and shall last until a final map is adopted by the commission to
replace it.
   (d)   The commission shall redraw council district boundaries only once per
decade as provided in subsection (a), unless the commission is ordered to do so
by a court or if requested by the city clerk to approve an update pursuant to
subsection (e).
   (e)   Any territory that is annexed, consolidated, or otherwise attached to
the city shall be allocated to a council district pursuant to this subsection,
effective upon the completion of such annexation, consolidation, or other
proceedings. The city clerk shall update the final map accordingly.
      (1)   If the territory's boundary is contiguous to the boundary of not
more than one council district, the territory shall be allocated to that
council district.
      (2)   If the territory's boundary is contiguous to the boundaries of two
or more council districts, the territory shall be allocated to the council
district with which it shares the longest boundary.
      (3)   If the territory's boundary is not contiguous with the boundary of
any council district, the territory shall be al-located to the closest council
district.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the time restrictions set forth in subsections (a),
(b), and (c) above, for the map based on the 2020 United States decennial
census, the commission shall adopt the final map establishing new council
districts no later than 130 days before the 2022 primary city election; and any
map that is effective before the councilmember candidate nomination period
opens may be used for the 2022 elections. (Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16;
amended by Res. 2020-0241, 11/3/20; amended by Res. 2022-0250, 7/26/22)
§ 172   Commission organization.
   (a)   The commission shall consist of 13 commissioners and 2 alternates.
Alternates may fully participate in commission deliberations but may not vote
and may not be counted towards the establishment of a quorum. Alternates are
subject to the same terms of office, qualifications, restrictions, and
standards of conduct as other commissioners under this article.
   (b)   The term of office of each commissioner begins on December 1 of a year
ending in zero, and expires on January 1 of the next year ending in zero. Sixty
days after a final map has been adopted the commission shall cease to meet,
unless reconvened by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or by the city
clerk or the city attorney pursuant to the following:
      (1)   The city clerk may reconvene the commission to approve a city clerk
update pursuant to Section 171(e).
      (2)   The city attorney may reconvene the commission to consider
settlement options if the final map is legally challenged.
   (c)   Nine commissioners constitute a quorum. The removal of a commissioner
or alternate; the approval of additional redistricting criteria; and the
approval of a proposed final map, final map, and final report require the
affirmative votes of nine commissioners. All other commission actions require
the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present.
   (d)   At its first meeting, the commission shall select one commissioner to
serve as chair and one to serve as vice chair. The commission may designate
other officers from its membership, and may establish subcommittees and ad hoc
committees. Subcommittees and ad hoc committees shall report on their actions
at the next meeting of the commission. (Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 173   Commissioner qualifications, requirements, and post-service
restrictions.
   (a)   Each commissioner must be a registered voter of the city and must
either:
      (1)   Have voted in two of the last three primary city elections
immediately preceding his or her application to be on the commission; or
      (2)   Have been a resident of the city for at least ten years immediately
preceding his or her application to be on the commission.
   (b)   The following persons are not eligible to be a commissioner:
      (1)   A person who - or whose spouse, registered domestic partner, or
child - has contributed to a candidate for city elective office, in a single
city election cycle in either of the last two city election cycles preceding
their date of application to be on the commission, more than 50 percent of the
allowable amount for a councilmember candidate.
      (2)   A person who - or whose spouse, registered domestic partner, or
child - is or has been, within the four years immediately preceding their date
of application to be on the commission, any of the following:
         (A)   A paid employee of the city;
         (B)   A registered city lobbyist, or someone who was required to be a
registered city lobbyist; or
         (C)   A paid employee of any redistricting contractor or consultant.
      (3)   A person who - or whose spouse, registered domestic partner,
parent, sibling, or child - has been, within ten years immediately preceding
their date of application to be on the commission, any of the following:
         (A)   Elected to, or a candidate for, city elective office;
         (B)   An employee of, or paid consultant or contractor to, a campaign
for city elective office;
         (C)   A paid employee of, a consultant to, or someone under contract
with any city elected official; or
         (D)   A principal officer of an active campaign committee domiciled in
the County of Sacramento that has made expenditures on candidate elections for
a city elective office.
   (c)   Within 30 days of appointment, a commissioner shall file with the city
clerk a statement of economic interest, or similar financial disclosure
statement, as required under the city's conflict of interest code.
   (d)   A commissioner shall be ineligible, for a period of ten years
beginning from the date of their appointment, to hold city elective office. A
commissioner shall be ineligible, for a period of four years beginning from the
date of their appointment, to be appointed to another city commission, to serve
as paid staff for or as a paid consultant to any city elected official, to
receive a non-competitively bid contract with the city, or to register as a
city lobbyist.
   (e)   A commissioner shall not contribute to or participate in any candidate
campaign for city elective office, from the date of appointment to the
commission until 60 days after the adoption of a final map. (Added by Res.
2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 174   Commissioner selection and removal.
   (a)   The commissioner selection process is designed to produce a commission
that is independent and that reasonably reflects the diversity of the city.
   (b)   The city clerk shall, no later than February 1, 2020, and by February
1 in each year ending in the number zero thereafter, initiate and widely
publicize an application process, open to all city registered voters who meet
the requirements of Section 173, in a manner that promotes a qualified
commissioner applicant pool that is large and reflective of the diversity of
the city. This process shall remain open until May 1, 2020 and until May 1 in
each year ending in the number zero thereafter.
   (c)   The city clerk shall create an application for prospective
commissioners, and seek assistance from a broad range of community-based
organizations in outreach efforts. Applicants shall attest on the application,
under penalty of perjury, that the information provided is true.
   (d)   No later than June 30 of each year ending in the number zero, the city
clerk shall report to the city council on applications received up to that
point and any additional outreach that is being undertaken or planned to ensure
that the applicant pool has a sufficient number of qualified applicants and
reasonably reflects the city's diversity.
   (e)   By August 1, 2020, and by August 1 in each year ending in the number
zero thereafter, the city clerk shall review and remove individuals who are
disqualified under Section 173 from among the commission applicants. If the
resulting applicant pool does not have at least 40 qualified applicants,
including 3 qualified applicants from each existing city council district, the
city clerk shall reopen the application period for one month and conduct
additional outreach to ensure that the pool meets these requirements.
   (f)   No later than September 15, 2020, and by September 15 in each year
ending in the number zero thereafter, the city clerk shall publish and transmit
to a screening panel a list with the names of all qualified applicants. For
purposes of this section, "screening panel" means:
      (1)   The city's ethics commission, if that commission is established by
ordinance or under this charter; or
      (2)   If an ethics commission matching the description in subsection (1)
does not exist, a panel consisting of: one retired judge; one law, government,
or public policy professor teaching at an accredited institution located in the
city and who has taught, researched, or published on redistricting; and one
member of a non-profit organization qualified under Internal Revenue Code
section 501(c)(3) that has at least a ten-year history of advocating for good
government reform in the city. The panelists shall be randomly selected by the
city attorney from a pool of qualified applicants. Panelists shall meet the
same qualifications required of commissioners in Section 173(b). The city
attorney shall recruit, over a two-month period, a pool of applicants to serve
on the screening panel; or
      (3)   If an ethics commission matching the description in subsection (1)
does not exist, and there are insufficient qualified applicants to form a panel
pursuant to paragraph (2), a panel consisting of the city attorney, the city
clerk, and the city auditor.
   (g)   From the eligible applicant pool, the screening panel shall, no later
than November 1, 2020, and by November 1 in each year ending in the number zero
thereafter, create a subpool of the 25 to 30 applicants most qualified to
perform the duties of the commission, including at least two applicants from
each existing council district. The screening panel, exercising its independent
judgment, shall make these assignments at a publicly noticed meeting after the
public has had the opportunity to provide written and oral comment. The
screening panel may ask additional questions of applicants at that meeting. The
screening panel shall make each assignment to the subpool on the basis of the
applicant's relevant analytical skills, familiarity with the city's
neighborhoods and communities, ability to be impartial, and apparent ability to
work cooperatively with other potential commissioners. The subpool should
reasonably reflect the city's diversity; provided that, other than the
requirement of geographic diversity in this subsection, no quotas, formulas, or
ratios may be applied for this purpose.
   (h)   Immediately after the subpool has been created, and at that same
public meeting, the chair of the screening panel shall randomly select eight
names - one from each existing council district - from the subpool. These eight
individuals shall serve as commissioners on the commission.
   (i)   The commissioners selected pursuant to subsection (h) shall select
five commissioners and two alternates from the remaining applicants in the
subpool. Each selection requires six affirmative votes from among the eight
commissioners, and the selection must be made at a publicly noticed meeting
after the public has had the opportunity to provide written and oral comment.
The commissioners shall make each selection on the basis of the applicant's
relevant analytical skills, familiarity with the city's neighborhoods and
communities, ability to be impartial, and apparent ability to work
cooperatively with other commissioners. The commission should reasonably
reflect the city's diversity; provided that no quotas, formulas, or ratios may
be applied for this purpose.
   (j)   The commission shall be fully established no later than December 1,
2020, and thereafter no later than December 1 in each year ending in the number
zero.
   (k)   The commission may remove a commissioner for substantial neglect of
duty, gross misconduct in office, or inability to discharge the duties of
office, but only after providing the subject commissioner written notice and an
opportunity for a response at a public meeting. A commissioner may appeal
removal by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the superior court within
ten days of the commission's action.
   (l)   If a commissioner resigns or is removed from the commission, the chair
of the commission shall randomly select one of the alternates to fill the
vacancy as a voting commissioner. If the commission is unable to act because
there are fewer than nine active commissioners, the city clerk shall, within
one month of making this determination, recruit a pool of qualified applicants
to fill the vacancies. The remaining commissioners shall, within two weeks of
the pool being constituted, appoint replacement commissioners from this pool by
a two-thirds vote.
   (m)   For purposes of this section, "diversity" includes, but is not limited
to, racial, ethnic, gender, and sexual orientation diversity. (Added by Res.
2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 175   Redistricting requirements and criteria.
   (a)   The commission shall draw its final map so that:
      (1)   Council districts are substantially equal in population;
      (2)   The final map complies with the U.S. Constitution; the Federal
Voting Rights Act, commencing at 42 U.S.C. section 1972; the California
Constitution; and any other requirement of federal or state law applicable to
charter cities; and
      (3)   Each council district is geographically contiguous.
   (b)   In addition to following the requirements of subsection (a), the
commission shall consider the following criteria when drawing the final map, in
order of priority:
      (1)   Existing neighborhoods and community boundaries;
      (2)   Communities of interest. A community of interest is a contiguous
population that shares common social and economic interests that should be
included within a single district for purposes of its effective and fair
representation;
      (3)   Integrity and compactness of territory;
      (4)   Geography and topography;
      (5)   Natural and artificial barriers and boundaries;
      (6)   Preservation of population cores that have consistently been
associated with each council district; and
      (7)   Other commission-adopted criteria that do not conflict with the
other requirements and criteria listed in this section or with state or federal
law.
   (c)   The commission shall not consider place of residence of any
individual, including any incumbent or political candidate, in the creation of
a map.
   (d)   The commission shall number each council district such that, for as
many residents as possible, the number of the council district they reside in
remains the same. (Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 176   Public meetings and public comment.
   (a)   The commission shall establish and implement an open meeting process
for public input and deliberation that is promoted through an outreach program
to solicit broad public participation in the redistricting process. The
commission shall comply with all applicable state and city requirements for
open meetings.
   (b)   Prior to adopting a final map, the commission shall hold at least
eight public meetings, including one public meeting in each existing council
district. A final map may not be adopted unless a proposed final map with
substantially similar council district boundaries has been adopted at least
seven days earlier at a prior public meeting.
   (c)   The commission shall establish and implement a process for accepting
written public comment, including the submission of draft maps and draft
partial maps for the commission's consideration.
   (d)   Commission members and staff may not communicate with or receive
communications about redistricting matters from anyone except at a public
meeting or through the process established for accepting written public
comment. This subsection does not prohibit:
      (1)   communication between commission members, staff, legal counsel, and
consultants retained by the commission that is otherwise permitted by state and
city open meeting requirements; or
      (2)   commissioners, staff, legal counsel, or consultants from engaging
in public education and outreach, including explaining how the commission
functions and encouraging public participation in the redistricting process.
   (e)   Any person who is compensated for communicating with the commission or
any commissioner, other than a reimbursement of reasonable travel expenses,
shall identify the party compensating them in such communication. (Added by
Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 177   Records and data.
   (a)   The commission shall comply with the California Public Records Act,
commencing with section 6250 of the California Government_Code, or its
successor, and any city laws regarding public records, to the degree they
require greater disclosure and retention of commission records than is provided
in this article.
   (b)   The commission and its subcommittees shall keep minutes of all
discussion and actions taken at public meetings. The minutes should be adopted
at the next public meeting of that body. To the greatest extent practicable,
all public meetings of the commission and its subcommittees shall be video
recorded.
   (c)   To the greatest extent practicable, the commission shall make
available to the public a free electronic mapping tool, loaded with relevant
population and demographic data, which tool can be used to create draft maps
and draft partial maps. (Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 178   Administration.
   (a)   The city council shall appropriate sufficient funds to recruit
commissioners, meet the operational needs of the commission, and conduct any
outreach program to solicit broad public participation in the redistricting
process. The council shall appropriate at least the amount spent in 2011 on
redistricting, adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index.
   (b)   The city manager, city clerk, and city attorney shall assign
sufficient staff to support the commission. The commission shall be staffed by
no less than three city employees: the city manager, the city clerk, and the
city attorney, or their respective representatives. The city attorney's only
client on matters relating to redistricting is the commission.
   (c)   Subject to the funds appropriated to the commission by the city
council, the commission may hire an executive director and redistricting,
technology, outreach, or other consultants, following a competitive selection
process.
   (d)   The city clerk and the city attorney, or their respective designees,
shall, no later than March 1, 2021, and thereafter by March 1 in every year
ending in one, train the commissioners on the requirements of this article,
federal and state law regarding redistricting, open meeting requirements, and
general rules of parliamentary procedure.
   (e)   The city clerk shall, by January 1, 2020, and thereafter by January 1
in every year ending in zero, provide a report to the city council that
explains, at minimum, plans for: recruiting a qualified applicant pool that the
reflects the city's diversity; assigning sufficient staff to support the
commission's activities; training commissioners; providing work space and
relevant technology to support the commission's activities, including city
email addresses for commissioners; facilitating an open selection process to
hire redistricting consultants; identifying and reserving meeting spaces
suitable for holding public meetings in each council district; creating a
website for the commission; and encouraging public participation in the
redistricting process.
   (f)   Within 60 days after the adoption of a final map, the commission shall
transmit a report to the city council recommending any changes, including
amendments to this article, that could improve the redistricting process in
future years. The city council may, by three-fourths vote, adopt by ordinance
changes to time limits and deadlines imposed by this article that are
specifically recommended by the commission.
   (g)   No person may threaten, intimidate, coerce, or take adverse action
against a commissioner, alternate, or a commission staffer because of their
affiliation with the commission, or because of any council district boundaries
that are considered, proposed, or adopted by the commission. (Added by Res.
2016-0258, 7/26/16)
§ 179   Legal challenge.
   (a)   The city attorney shall defend the final map adopted by the commission
from any legal challenge. The city attorney may not settle any legal challenge
without the commission's approval.
   (b)   Any registered voter in the city may file a petition for a writ of
mandate or writ of prohibition within 30 days after the commission has adopted
a final map, to bar the implementation of all or a portion of the new council
district boundaries on the grounds that the final map violates this article. No
legal challenge may be brought against the final map under this article after
the 30-day period has expired.
   (c)   If a legal challenge is successfully brought against the final map,
the court may correct the violation by court order adjusting council district
boundaries consistent with the redistricting requirements and criteria of
Section 175; alternatively, if the court finds the final map requires
significant revisions or must be entirely redrawn, the court may order the
commission to reconvene to adjust or adopt new council district boundaries.
(Added by Res. 2016-0258, 7/26/16)
Article XIII. Franchises, Licenses, Permits, Leases and Sales
§ 180   Franchises, licenses, permits.
   The city council shall have authority to grant or issue franchises, licenses
and permits for the transaction of business of the providing of services, or
for the use of public streets or other public places. The city council shall
provide by ordinance uniform procedures for the granting or issuing thereof,
the taxes, charges, fees or other compensation to be paid therefore and the
penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 181   Leases, sales.
   The city council shall have authority to lease or sell real and personal
property owned or controlled by the city in accordance with such uniform
procedure as it shall adopt by ordinance, provided, however, that no lease of
real property shall be for a term in excess of 55 years or for such longer term
as may be allowed by general state law.
§ 182   Right to acquire.
   No franchise grant shall be construed to impair or affect the right of the
city, acting pursuant to law, to acquire the property of the grantee either by
purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain.
Article XIV. Public Contracts and Supplies
§ 200   Ordinance governing purchasing and contracts-Duty of chief
administrative officer or representative.
   The city manager, or his designated representatives, shall purchase, or
contract for the purchase of, goods, equipment, materials, supplies, services,
or for the undertaking of any public project in the manner prescribed by
ordinance enacted by the city council, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 201   Same-Requirements of competitive bidding for public projects.
   Any ordinance adopted to implement Section 200 of this article shall
provide, in the case of a contract for the undertaking of any public project,
where the amount therefor equals or exceeds the amount set by said ordinance,
that said contract will be open to competitive bidding and that the procedures
for such bidding shall include the public advertisement thereof and an award to
the lowest responsible bidder.
§ 202   Same-Requirements of competitive bidding for supplies, etc.
   Any ordinance adopted to implement Section 200 of this article shall provide
in the case of any purchase or contract for goods, equipment, materials and
supplies, except materials and supplies as defined in Section 204 of this
article, where the amount therefore equals or exceeds the amount set by said
ordinance, that said purchase or contract will be open to competitive bidding,
and that the procedures for such bidding shall include the public advertisement
thereof and an award to the lowest responsible bidder.
§ 203   Same-Rights of city council.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the council
may do any of the following: reject any and all bids received for any purchase
or contract; readvertise for new bids after such rejection; provide for the
suspension of competitive bidding for any contract or purchase upon a finding
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote that such action is in the best interests of the
city; provided that any work required by the city may be performed by city
employees.
§ 204   Same-Public project defined.
   As used in this article, public project means:
   (a)   A project for the erection, improvement, and remodeling of public
buildings and works.
   (b)   Work in or about streams, bays, water fronts, embankments, or other
work for protection against overflow.
   (c)   Street, sewer or water work except maintenance or repair.
   (d)   Furnishing supplies or materials for any such project.
§ 205   Same-Competitive bidding under state law.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any contract entered into
pursuant to or under any special assessment proceeding wherein competitive
bidding proceedings are specified by laws of the State of California.
Article XV. Boards, Commissions and Agencies
§ 230   Boards and Commissions-Creation and appointments.
   The city council shall provide by ordinance for such boards and commissions
as may be required by law or deemed desirable, shall prescribe their functions,
and may prescribe qualifications and conditions of service on such boards and
commissions, including compensation and reimbursement for expenses, terms or
office, method of appointment and removal. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Charter, the mayor shall appoint all members of boards and
commissions, subject to the concurrence of a majority of the city council.
§ 231   Functions of boards and commissions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the authority and functions of
boards and commissions shall be specified by ordinance or resolution,
consistent with applicable federal and state law.
§ 232   Removal of members of boards and commissions.
   For good cause, neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a member of a city
board or commission who has been appointed for a specified term by the city
council or by the mayor with the approval of the city council, may be removed
from office during such term by the city council. Such member may be removed
only after such member has been given a copy of the charges against such member
at least ten days prior to a hearing to be held on the charges. At the hearing
the member shall have an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel.
Article XVI. Provisions Miscellaneous
§ 250   Continuing provisions of former charter.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt ordinances to continue in effect, without
substantial modification, the following provisions of the Charter of the City
of Sacramento as the same existed on the date immediately preceding the
adoption of this article:
      Section 264. E. B. Crocker Art Gallery.
      Section 265. Ann Land Memorial Fund.
      Section 266. William Land Park Fund.
   (b)   Ordinances required to be adopted under this section shall be adopted
as soon as possible on or immediately following the effective date of this
article.
   (c)   Ordinances required to be adopted under this section may be amended
from time to time to conform same to any order or judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided herein, ordinances adopted under this
section shall continue in full
   force and effect unless repealed or amended by ordinance submitted to and
approved by the electorate of the city.
§ 251   Conflicts of interest.
   The city council by ordinance shall adopt regulations as the council, in its
sole discretion determines to be appropriate, governing conflicts of interest
applicable to city officers and employees, members of boards and commissions,
and elected officials and candidates for elective office of the city. The
council shall not be required to negotiate or meet and confer with officers,
employees or employee organizations regarding the adoption of such regulations.
§ 252   Severability.
   If any provision of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Charter, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 253   Injury in performance of duty.
   Except as hereinafter provided, any city employee who is disabled, whether
temporarily or permanently, by injury or illness arising out of and in the
course of his duties, shall be entitled to such medical, surgical, and hospital
treatment, including nursing, medicines and medical and surgical supplies and
apparatus as may be required on account of such injury or illness, the same to
be provided by the city. Such employee shall become entitled during the period
of such temporary disability, regardless of his period of service with the
city, to leave of absence while so disabled without loss of salary, in lieu of
temporary disability payments, if any, which would be payable under Division 4
of the Labor_Code of the State of California, for the period of such
disability, but not exceeding one year, or until such earlier date as he is
retired upon a retirement allowance. Compensation and benefits payable to or on
behalf of the employee under this section, shall be reduced, in the manner
fixed by the city council, by the amount of any compensation and benefits
payable to or on behalf of said employee under Division 4 of the Labor_Code of
the State of California. Compensation and benefits paid under this section
shall be considered as in lieu of compensation and benefits payable to or on
account of said employee under said state law and shall be in satisfaction and
discharge of the obligation of the city to pay such compensation and benefits
under such state law. The benefits provided in this section shall be limited to
full-time officers and employees of the city and, except as provided herein,
shall not be extended to persons employed by the city on a seasonal limited-
term, part-time or substitute basis, or elective officers or appointive members
of city boards and commissions. The city council, by ordinance enacted by two-
thirds of all members thereof, may permit employees of the city, other than
full-time officers and employees of the city, to receive all or a portion of
the compensation and benefits provided to full-time officers and employees by
the provisions of this section.
§ 254   Effective date.
   All amendments to this Charter contained within the ballot proposition which
approved the enactment of this article shall take effect on January 1, 1978,
except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter. The term "effective
date" as used in this article shall mean January 1, 1978, and the term "this
Charter" as used in this article shall mean the City Charter, as amended on the
effective date.
Article XVII. Sacramento City Employees' Retirement System
§ 371   Effective date.
   At the time these amendments to the Sacramento City Charter are submitted to
the electors of the city, they are intended to take effect on January 13, 1990.
In the event that such amendments are adopted by the electors of the city, but
for any reason are not filed with the Secretary of State on or prior to January
13, 1990, then in such event, they shall be effective on the first day of the
month next following the date they are filed with the Secretary of State.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 372   Transfer of safety members to PERS; continuation of PERS agreements.
   The city council may enter into a contract with the Board of Administration
of the Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS) for participation in that
system of the city and employees who are, as of the effective date of any such
contract, safety members of the Sacramento City Employees' Retirement System
(SCERS). Any such contract (hereafter "new contract") shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   (a)   The new contract shall cover all active safety employees who are
members of SCERS.
   (b)   The existing contract with PERS for participation in that system or
the city and employees whose date of city employment is on or after January 29,
1977 shall continue in effect, as amended by the city council from time to
time.
   (c)   The new contract shall specify that active safety employees shall be
transferred to PERS and become PERS local safety members.
   (d)   The benefits prescribed in the new contract shall, for safety
employees, be as follows:
      (1)   2% at age 50 with 3% cost-of-living allowance for transferred
active safety SCERS employees.
      (2)   2.5% at age 55 with 2% cost-of-living allowance for employees hired
after the effective date of the new contract, with the statutory employee
contribution rate. If the statutory employee contribution rate is other than
9%, the actual employee contribution rate shall be 9% of compensation.
   (e)   The procedures specified in Government_Code Sections 20457 and 20458,
as those sections may be amended or renumbered from time to time, relating to
the holding of an election among the safety members of SCERS, shall be
followed.
   (f)   The new contract shall specify that an allocable proportion of the
assets and funds of SCERS shall be transferred to PERS pursuant to Government
Code Sections 20522 and 20523, or some comparable procedure approved by the
city council.
   (g)   The city council, if it enters into such contract, is authorized to
take any action on behalf of the city required or permitted under the Public
Employees' Retirement Law.
   (h)   The new contract shall provide that active safety employees who are
SCERS members and who are transferred to PERS shall pay to PERS the same
contribution rates as they were paying to SCERS, pursuant to Government_Code
Section 20605.5. In the event that the procedures specified in this paragraph
require modification, the city council shall have the authority to adopt such
modification by ordinance prior to approving a new contract with PERS.
   (i)   Any application for retirement or death benefit which is pending as of
the effective date of these amendments to the Sacramento City Charter shall be
deemed to be an application under PERS. For purposes of this subsection (1) an
application is "pending" when:
      (1)   it is pending before the retirement system manager; or
      (2)   an appeal relating to the application is pending before the
Retirement Hearing Commission; or
      (3)   the Retirement Hearing Commission has determined the appeal and the
time for seeking judicial review has not expired; or
      (4)   the Retirement Hearing Commission has determined the appeal and
judicial review has been timely sought by any party to the appeal, and no final
judgment has been entered in the Superior Court; or
      (5)   a final judgment has been entered in the Superior Court and the
appellate period has not expired, or timely appellate review has been sought
and no final appellate judgment has been issued.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 373   Modifications of system or PERS contract.
   The city council shall secure an actuarial report of the probable cost and
effect to the system, its members and the city, of any proposed change in the
contribution rates or benefits under the system before enacting an ordinance or
resolution relating to changes in the contribution rates or benefits under the
system or before voting to submit to the electorate any proposed Charter
amendment or ordinance providing for such changes. Prior to enacting any
ordinance pursuant to former (1989) Charter section 400, defining or redefining
the term "compensation," the city council shall secure an actuarial report of
the probable cost and effect to the system, its members and the city resulting
from the enactment of any such ordinance.
   The city council may from time to time amend any contract with PERS. If it
enters into any contract amendment, the city council is authorized to take any
action on behalf of the city required or permitted under the Public Employees'
Retirement Law. Prior to entering into any such amendment relating to
contribution rates or benefits, the city council shall secure an actuarial
report of the probable cost and effect to the city and the affected members of
such amendment. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 374   Duty to continue existing system.
   Subject to section
372, the council shall provide, by ordinance or ordinances, for the
continuance, as part of the retirement system, of all employee retirement plans
in operation upon the effective date of this article. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this article, no such plan, or any provision thereof,
shall be modified or amended except through the adoption of an ordinance
approved by a majority of the voters voting upon such proposition at a general
municipal election or a special municipal election called for such purpose.
Allowances existing in favor of or on account of retired employees of the city
at the time of the adoption of this article shall be continued in force in
accordance with the provisions under which said allowances were made. Except as
provided in section
379, relating to cost-of-living adjustments, nothing in this article shall be
construed as changing the status of members of such existing plans or the
benefits thereunder. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, the
council shall provide by ordinance for continuation of the benefits of
transferred members (as defined in former (1976) Charter section 359 and 360)
pursuant to former (1976) Charter sections 359 through 366; provided, however,
that any such transferred member shall have the right to elect in the manner
provided by ordinance adopted by the city council, to have his or her rate of
contribution, as required by former (1976) Charter section 365, based upon the
rate of contribution for members of the plan established by former (1989)
Charter section 399.
   The council shall enact an ordinance or ordinances prescribing the
conditions by which any member of the system retired for service or disability
under the provisions of former (1976) Charter sections 173, 175.13 or 302 may
make an election to receive a reduced retirement allowance during the member's
lifetime in order that the member's surviving spouse may receive a continuation
allowance. The provisions of said ordinance or ordinances shall substantially
conform to the provisions of former (1989) Charter section 435(a), provided
that no continuation allowance shall be payable unless one would otherwise be
payable under the provisions of the Charter which apply to the member and
provided further that the continuation allowance under former (1976) Charter
section 173 shall be two-thirds or the member's reduced allowance. (Amended
June 6 1989)
§ 375   Actuarial assumption for "equal shares retirement plan".
   The ordinance or ordinances enacted by the council under section
374, providing for the continuance of the "equal shares retirement plan"
created by former (1976) Charter section 302, shall provide that the board
shall direct the actuary in making the actuarial investigations and evaluations
required by former (1976) Charter section 300 for purposes of determining
members' contribution rates to assume in addition to all other actuarial
assumptions:
   (a)   That all persons who enter the employ of the city on or after the
effective date of this article and who would have been eligible for membership
in the "equal shares retirement plan" under former (1976) Charter section 302
and ordinances enacted thereunder before the effective date of this article,
are members of the "equal shares retirement plan" if they would have remained
in the employ of the city; and
   (b)   That no person who was a member of the "equal shares retirement plan"
on the effective date of this article made the election provided by former
(1989) Charter section 401.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 376   City contributions for liability under prior plans.
   The adoption of this article shall not alter or modify the liability of the
city, the retirement system, or its members, for retirement plans which were in
existence upon the effective date of this article, nor shall it alter or modify
the method of funding such plans as prescribed in former (1976) Charter
sections 167 to 175.29 and 290 to 367, except as provided in former (1989)
Charter sections 374, 375 and 379. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 377   Validation of former Charter sections granting increased pensions to
retired persons.
   All provisions of former (1976) Charter sections 173.2, 173.3, 173.4 and
173.5 granting increased retirement allowances to or on account of retired
members of the Sacramento City Employees' Retirement System shall be continued
as an ordinance of the city and shall continue in effect until otherwise
repealed by subsequent amendment of this Charter, The provisions of former
(1976) Charter section 175.29 shall be continued in effect as an ordinance of
the city, but only insofar as necessary to continue in effect cost-of-living
adjustments and the funding or such adjustments which have been made under said
section and were in effect prior to July 1, 1970. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 378   City employees transferred to Sacramento County.
   The city council shall enact an ordinance or ordinances prescribing the
conditions according to which any and all employees of the city, who are
members of the Sacramento City Employees' Retirement System and who, on or
after January 1, 1963, are transferred to and become employees of Sacramento
County and members of the Sacramento County Employees' Retirement System, as
part of any consolidation of city functions with, or transfer of city functions
to, Sacramento County, may retain their membership in the Sacramento City
Employees' Retirement System. The provisions of said ordinance shall
substantially conform to the provisions of former (1976) Charter section 175.27
with such modifications as are necessary to make the provisions of said section
applicable to the transferred employees. This section shall not apply to any
employee of the city who becomes a member of this system after the effective
date of any reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to former (1976)
Charter section 367. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 379   Cost-of-living adjustment.
   The city council shall enact an ordinance or ordinances prescribing the
conditions according to which, as of July 1 of each year, every monthly
allowance payable to or on account of a member of this system whose retirement
or death as a member of this system occurred prior to July 1 of the preceding
year shall be increased or decreased by a percentage of the allowance then
being received. Such percentage shall approximate, to the nearest one-tenth of
one percent, the percentage of annual increase or decrease, if any, in the
cost-of living during the whole of the preceding calendar year by reference to
the current U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer
Price Index for the San Francisco-Oakland area (or the Sacramento area, in the
event the Index is established for the Sacramento area), for the whole of the
preceding calendar year; provided that such increase or decrease shall not
exceed three percent of any allowance in any year, regardless of the percentage
of change in cost-of-living; and provided further that no allowance shall be
reduced below the amount payable at death or retirement.
   In addition to the increase provided in the preceding paragraph, the city
council shall enact an ordinance or ordinances prescribing the conditions
according to which, as of July 1 of each year, every monthly allowance payable
to or on account of a member of this system whose retirement or death as a
member of this system occurred on or after July 1 of the preceding year shall
be increased or decreased by a percentage of the allowance then being received.
For each whole month of the preceding fiscal year during which a member was
retired or for each whole month of the preceding fiscal year after the member's
death, such percentage shall approximate one-twelfth of the percentage of
annual increase or decrease (to the nearest one-tenth of one percent), if any,
in the cost-of-living during the whole of the preceding calendar year by
reference to the current U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics'
Consumer Price Index for the San Francisco-Oakland area (or the Sacramento
area, in the event the Index is established for the Sacramento area), for the
whole of the preceding calendar year; provided that such increase or decrease
shall not exceed three percent of any allowance in any year, regardless of the
percentage of change in cost-of-living; and provided further that no allowance
shall be reduced below the amount payable at death or retirement. The
provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to members whose retirement or
death occurred on or after July 2, 1979.
   The amount of any monthly allowance payable to a survivor or beneficiary
upon death of a retired person shall be the amount which would be payable as of
the date of death had payment of such allowance begun on the date of
retirement, and shall thereafter be adjusted in accordance with this section.
   The amount of any cost-of-living increase or decrease in any year which is
in excess or the maximum annual allowance adjustment of three percent provided
in this section shall be accumulated from year-to-year and included in the
computation of increases or decreases in succeeding years. The provisions of
this paragraph shall be applied to the allowance of individual beneficiaries by
classes based upon the fiscal year in which the member retired or died, so that
each allowance shall have applied to it only such increase or decrease as shall
have accumulated during or after the fiscal year in which the member retired or
died. No allowance shall be reduced by operation of this section below the
amount payable at the time or retirement.
   Increases in allowances payable pursuant to this section shall be funded by
contributions of the members subject to this section and contributions of the
city. The individual member's contribution shall be at the rate of 6.7% of his
or her contributions (excluding additional contributions under former (1989)
Charter section 404). The city's contribution shall be determined by the board
in accordance with its funding policy in former (1989) Charter section 385 at a
rate required to fund the cost of increases under this section and former
(1976) Charter section 354 not provided by member contributions. The board
shall provide for transfer to members' accounts under this section of the
portion of accumulated contributions under former (1976) Charter section 354
which were made by members thereunder becoming subject to this section.
   The city council shall provide by ordinance for the continuation of benefits
provided by former (1976) Charter section 354 for members of this system who
have elected to receive the benefits provided by former (1976) Charter section
354. The provisions of said ordinance shall substantially conform to the
provisions of former (1976) Charter section 175.29 and shall include the
provisions of the second paragraph of this section; provided, however, that in
fixing the rates for member contributions the board shall assume that all
persons who are members of this system or are members of PERS and are in the
employ of the city would continue to make contributions and receive benefits
under former (1976) Charter section 354. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 380   General definitions.
   The following words and phrases as used in this article and ordinances
enacted thereunder, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the
context, shall mean:
   "Board" shall mean the Administration, Investment and Fiscal Management
Board as referred to in section
381 of this Charter.
   "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Sacramento.
   "Commission" shall mean the Retirement Hearing Commission as referred to in
section 388 of this Charter.
   "Council" or "city council" shall mean the council of the City of
Sacramento.
   "Former (1976) Charter section" shall mean a section of this Charter as said
section read on November 1, 1976 which was the date immediately preceding the
date on which said section was repealed and shall further mean and refer to any
section which was repealed at any earlier date, as such section read on the
date immediately preceding its repeal.
   "Former (1989) Charter section" shall mean a section of this Charter as said
section read on June 5, 1989, which was the date immediately preceding the date
on which said section was repealed.
   "Member" shall mean any person who is a member of the retirement system.
   "Miscellaneous member" or "miscellaneous officer or employee" shall mean any
officer or employee who is a member of the retirement system and is not a
safety member as defined in this section.
   "Retirement system" or "system" shall mean Sacramento City Employees'
Retirement System referred to in sections
372 and
374.
   "Safety member" shall mean a member whose employment is, or was, as an
officer or employee of the police or the fire departments of the city, whose
principal duties consist of either active law enforcement or full-time
firefighting and fire prevention, respectively. "Safety member" does not
include those persons employed in duties of clerical, communication,
identification, repair, or other nature even though such persons may be subject
to occasional call, or are occasionally called upon to perform duties within
the scope of active law enforcement or full-time firefighting and fire
prevention.
   "Surviving spouse" shall mean the widow of a male member or the widower of a
female member.
   Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
genders and the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 381   Administration, Investment and Fiscal Management Board.
   The retirement system shall be managed by the Administration, Investment and
Fiscal Management Board which shall consist of the following persons:
   (a)   The city manager or designated representative;
   (b)   The city finance director, or designated representative;
   (c)   The city treasurer, or designated representative;
   (d)   A resident of the city not connected with the government thereof,
appointed by the city council, who is qualified by training and experience in
the management and investment of funds; and
   (e)   A resident of the city not connected with the government thereof,
appointed by the city council.
   A majority of members of the board shall constitute a quorum. Action by the
board shall require the affirmative vote of three members, except that a lesser
number may adjourn from time to time.
   The two incumbent board members holding the seats described in subparagraphs
(d) and (e) shall continue to serve until the expiration of the term for which
they were initially appointed, or until a successor is appointed. Thereafter,
such members shall be appointed for a term of three years, or until a successor
is appointed. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 382   General powers.
   Subject to the provisions of sections 388 and 391, the board shall have full
authority under the Charter and such general ordinances as may be lawfully
adopted by the city council to maintain and manage retirement plans of this
system, including but not limited to the adoption of investment standards, the
fixing of contribution rates, the administration and investment of funds, the
selection of investment advisors, the crediting of interest, any action
required of it by the Charter and any action relating to the fiscal management
of the system except those matters directly pertaining to claims for benefits,
and claims for refunds under former (1989) Charter section 436, filed with the
retirement system manager.
   All references to the "retirement board" or "board" in former (1976) Charter
sections 167 to 175.29, inclusive (and ordinances enacted to maintain and
implement the retirement plans created by said sections) and former (1976)
Charter sections 290 to 367 inclusive (and ordinances enacted to maintain and
implement the retirement plans created by said sections) shall mean the
Administration, Investment and Fiscal Management Board; provided, however,
nothing herein shall divest the Retirement Hearing Commission of the appellate
powers granted to it by section
388 of this Charter; and when said commission has jurisdiction by virtue of an
appeal having been lawfully taken to the commission, all references to the
"retirement board" or "board" in such former Charter sections and ordinances
shall mean the Retirement Hearing Commission. It is further provided that
nothing herein shall divest the retirement system manager of the powers granted
to him or her by section
391 of this Charter; and when said manager has jurisdiction by reason of a
claim for benefits having been lawfully filed with him or her, all references
to the "retirement board" or "board" in such former (1976) Charter sections and
ordinances shall mean the retirement system manager.
   The board may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this article to
implement and carry out its provisions. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 383   Administration and investment of funds.
   The board shall have exclusive control of the administration of such fund or
funds as may come into the possession of the system, provided that all
investments shall be investments permissible by law for investment of trust
funds (as provided in section 16040 of the California Probate_Code) and shall
conform to general investment standards approved by the city council. The board
shall adopt general investment standards which the city council shall either
approve or disapprove. The board shall employ and obtain advice and services
from professional financial advisors, expert in their respective fields, such
as investment counsel, trust companies or trust departments of banks, in regard
to the management and investment of the funds in the system. Nothing contained
in this article shall be construed to prevent the board from administering,
managing and investing the funds of the system as a single fund. (Amended June
6, 1989)
§ 384   Actuarial investigation.
   The board shall use the services of a consulting actuary to advise it on
matters relating to funding and administration of the system and to make
actuarial valuations.
   On or before January 1 of every third year, in accordance with the board's
schedule in effect on the effective date of this article as amended, the board
shall establish contribution rates for the next succeeding three-year period.
Said contribution rates shall be those recommended by the actuary for the
system in the actuarial report accepted by the board (except where the board
rejects a report) as hereinafter set forth.
   The actuary for the system either shall be an enrolled actuary under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ("ERISA") or any succeeding law
and a member of the American Academy of Actuaries or shall meet such experience
and other requirements as are approximately equivalent to those applicable to
an enrolled actuary under ERISA and to a member of the American Academy of
Actuaries.
   The actuary for the system shall carry out such valuations of the costs of
the system as are required to estimate the contribution rates required to fund
the system. Such valuation shall be made not less frequently than every three
years. The actuary shall present to the board a valuation report covering the
findings of each such valuation, which report shall be accepted by the board or
rejected as hereinafter provided.
   The board may reject a valuation report of the actuary of the system in its
sole discretion. In the event that the board should reject a valuation report
of the actuary for the system, the board shall forthwith appoint a new actuary
for the system. If the new actuary for the system shall be unable to complete
his or her report by the date when revised contribution rates are required to
become effective or if the board should reject the new actuary's report, then
the rejected valuation report by the former actuary for the system shall
determine the contribution rates until the board subsequently accepts a
valuation report from a new actuary for the system. The board may determine
that the contribution rates adopted pursuant to the new actuary's report shall
be retroactive to the date when revised contribution rates were required to
become effective.
   No actuarial method or assumption to be used in any actuarial study of the
system shall be adopted by the board unless the actuary retained by the board
recommends such method or assumption. No method shall be used in any actuarial
valuation of the system unless such method is a widely used, sound, and well-
recognized actuarial method which is used to establish the cost of pension plan
benefits and expenses.
   The actuary for the system shall develop the actuarial assumptions to be
used in evaluating the costs of the system. To the extent deemed appropriate by
the actuary, actuarial assumptions shall be based on the experience of the
system. The actuary shall use his or her best judgment in interpreting prior
experience of the system, similar experience elsewhere, trends, and opinions in
his or her development of such actuarial assumptions. Each actuarial assumption
shall represent as realistic an appraisal of relevant future experience
(including expected inflation) at the time the assumption is made, and all
assumptions considered together shall be such that their use shall permit the
actuary to make an estimate of costs which he or she believes to be a
reasonable one. The actuary shall submit in his or her report a full discussion
of all assumptions used in the actuarial valuation.
   The board shall direct the actuary to determine the amount and character of
all unfunded liability of the system using widely used, sound, and well-
recognized actuarial methods and shall direct the actuary to determine the
contribution rates according to section 385. Neither terminal funding cost
method nor the current funding (pay-as-you-go) cost method is an acceptable
method, and neither of such methods shall be recommended by the actuary or
adopted by the board; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the
funding of benefits for service rendered prior to April 1, 1935, or to the
funding of benefits provided pursuant to the retirement plans created by former
(1976) Charter sections 173, 175, 175.1, 175.13 and to benefits payable to
transferred employees as provided in section
374 of this Charter. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 385   Funding.
   It shall be the policy of the board to set rates which shall:
   (a)   Cause the city to pay the unfunded city costs of the system as of
January 1 1977, based upon an actuarial evaluation as of June 30, 1976, over a
period ending on June 30, 2007;
   (b)   Cause the city to amortize any increases or decreases in the estimated
city costs of the system which occur after June 30, 1976, over periods of time
ending on the latter of June 30, 2007, or ten (10) years after the dates such
increases or decreases were incurred;
   (c)   Cause the city to make such city contributions as may be required to
amortize liabilities described in (a) or (b) preceding as a level percentage of
total payroll;
   (d)   Cause the city to begin to make the city contributions described in
Subparagraph (a) beginning on January 1, 1983, and to make contributions
beginning on January 1, 1977, such that the city contributions for the six (6)
succeeding calendar years will be expected to increase each year uniformly as a
percentage of total payroll from the amount actually contributed by the city in
fiscal year 1976-77 to that estimated as required under Subparagraph (c) for
the calendar year following January 1, 1983, and later; and,
   (e)   Cause the city to comply with any applicable federal law relating to
minimum funding of this system, notwithstanding any provision in this section
to the contrary.
(Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 386   Accounting.
   As nearly as practicable, the accounting system for the retirement system
shall conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The board shall
cause the funds of the retirement system to be accounted for according to
membership in, and funds contributed to, each plan in the system. Accumulated
contributions of members shall be accounted for according to individual
members' accounts. In accounting for contributions under this plan and the
"equal shares retirement plan" created by former (1976) Charter section 302,
the city's contributions for safety members and for miscellaneous members shall
be accounted separately by group. The accounting system shall account
separately for accumulated contributions of all retired and deceased members
held for payment of annuities to or on account of such members and city
contributions held for payment of pensions to or on account of such members.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 387   Interest.
   At least annually, the board shall review the new investment earnings of the
system on invested funds and shall determine the annual interest rate which
shall be used in determining the amount of interest to be credited to
contributions of the city, contributions of members and contributions of
retired members. Said interest rate shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
net rate of return from investments by the system as determined by the board.
   Upon determining the rate of interest to be credited, the board shall
periodically cause such interest to be credited to such contributions. Any
difference between net investment earnings of the system and the interest
credited to contributions shall be credited to such fund or funds of the
retirement system as may be determined by the board. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 388   Retirement Hearing Commission.
   The Retirement Hearing Commission shall have jurisdiction only to hear
appeals as hereinafter described. Any person who has a direct financial
interest who is adversely affected by a decision of the retirement system
manager with respect to such person's claim for benefits, or claim for a refund
pursuant to former (1989) Charter section 436, shall have the right to appeal
to the Retirement Hearing Commission.
   Prior to the commission acting upon any appeal filed with it, the commission
shall refer said appeal to an independent hearing officer. Such hearing officer
shall hear the matter and make a recommendation to the commission, which
recommendation shall include proposed findings of fact and a proposed decision.
The commission, after reviewing the record, the proposed findings of fact and
proposed decision, and taking such additional evidence as may be necessary, may
adopt, modify or reject the proposed findings of fact and proposed decision.
   All hearing officers shall be provided by the Office of Administrative
Hearings of the State of California, or its successor in interest; provided,
however, that the commission, with the approval of the city council, may
prescribe rules for selecting hearing officers other than from the Office of
Administrative Hearings.
   The cost of securing hearing officers shall be borne by the city.
   The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures to be followed by
the commission in matters relating to its duties. The commission, with the
approval of the city council, may contract to obtain such services and advice
as are necessary to carry out its duties pursuant to the Charter. (Amended June
6, 1989)
§ 389   Membership.
   The commission shall consist of the following persons:
   (a)   The city manager, or designated representative;
   (b)   The city finance director, or designated representative;
   (c)   A resident of the city, not a member of the board, not connected with
the government of the city; and
   (d)   Two miscellaneous members of the system.
   A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
Action by the commission shall require the affirmative vote of three members,
except that a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. (Amended June 6,
1989)
§ 390   Selection of members; terms.
   (a)   Selection. Members of the commission other than the city manager or
designated representative and the city finance director or designated
representative, shall be selected as follows:
      (1)   The city resident member of the commission shall be appointed by
and serve at the pleasure or the city council; and
      (2)   Each employee member shall be selected under election procedures
established by the city council by and from active miscellaneous members of the
system.
   (b)   Terms. The terms of office of the commission members, other than the
city manager or designated representative and the city finance director or
designated representative, shall be for fixed terms of four (4) years and until
their successors are selected. Provided, however, that the first term of each
such member shall be as follows:
      (1)   The city resident member serving on the commission on the day
preceding the effective date of these amendments shall serve as a commission
member until the expiration of his or her current four-year term, or until a
successor is selected.
      (2)   The miscellaneous member serving on the commission on the day
preceding the effective date of these amendments shall serve as a commission
member until December 31, 1993, or until a successor is selected.
      (3)   So as to stagger the terms of the two miscellaneous members, the
first term of the second miscellaneous member shall end December 31, 1991 or
until a successor is selected. Thereafter the member selected to serve as the
second miscellaneous member shall serve for the four-year fixed term.
(Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 391   Retirement system manager.
   The city manager shall appoint a retirement system manager who shall serve
as secretary of the board and secretary of the commission. Subject to the
provisions of section 388, the retirement system manager shall have full
authority under the Charter and such general ordinances as may be lawfully
adopted by the city council to determine when and to what extent members may
receive or may continue to receive benefits of any type or kind under the
retirement system. All claims for benefits payable by the Sacramento City
Employees' Retirement System, and claims for refunds under former (1989)
Charter section 436, shall be filed with the retirement system manager. The
city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures to be followed by the
retirement system manager in matters relating to his or her duties.
   The retirement system manager, with the approval of the city council, may
contract to obtain such services and advice as are necessary to carry out his
or her duties pursuant to this Charter. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 392   Legal counsel.
   The city attorney shall serve as the legal counsel for the board, the
commission and the retirement system. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 393   Costs.
   All usual, normal and reasonable costs of administering the retirement
system, including actuarial fees and costs, shall be borne by the city. When an
agreement is entered into by the board with professional financial advisors,
such as investment counsel, trust companies, or trust department of banks in
regard to the management and investment of the funds in the system, any fee
stipulated in such agreement to be paid to such financial advisors shall not be
considered a cost of administration but shall be considered as a charge against
the assets of the retirement system to be apportioned among the fund or funds
of the retirement system as determined by the board. In addition, any other
ordinary costs incurred in regard to the management and investment of the funds
in the system, including, but not limited to, brokers' fees, attorneys' fees,
insurance, taxes, and property management fees, shall not be considered a cost
of administration but shall be considered as a charge against the assets of the
retirement system to be apportioned among the fund or funds of the retirement
system as determined by the board. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 394   Social security coverage.
   The city council shall enact an ordinance or ordinances prescribing the
conditions according to which any and all miscellaneous employees of the city
may be covered under the Old Age, Survivors, Disability and Health Insurance
provisions of the Social Security Act. The provisions of any ordinance or
ordinances applicable to miscellaneous members of the system shall
substantially conform to the provisions of former (1976) Charter section
175.12.5 with such modifications as are necessary to make the provisions of
said section applicable to miscellaneous members of the "equal shares
retirement plan" and the former (1989) Charter Section 399 Plan. (Amended June
6, 1989)
§ 395   Reciprocity with other governmental retirement systems.
   The city council may, subject to the provisions of section 373 of this
article, enact ordinances and enter into agreements concerning reciprocity with
the retirement systems of other governmental entities.
   The ordinance may provide for a modification of rights and benefits of a
member of the system because of membership in a reciprocal system similar to
and under the same conditions as those provided under the County Employees'
Retirement Law of 1937 and the Public Employees' Retirement Law because of
membership in two or more retirement systems established by or pursuant to such
laws. The ordinance shall be filed with each board administering a reciprocal
system and shall become effective upon the adoption of a resolution of such
administering board accepting the city system as a reciprocal system. Such
modification shall apply only to a member whose termination and entry into
employment occurred after such effective date.
   As a condition precedent to his or her eligibility to receive reciprocal
benefits under this section, the ordinance may require a member of the system
to relinquish any benefits to which he or she would be entitled under
ordinances enacted pursuant to section 378 of this article. The ordinance shall
provide that the provisions of section 378 of this article shall not be
applicable to any employee of the city who becomes a member of this system
after the effective date of any reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to
former (1976) Charter section 367.
   A reciprocal system, for purposes of this section, means a retirement system
established under the County Employees' Retirement Law of 1937, the Public
Employees' Retirement System, a retirement system of a city whose retirement
ordinance contains the provisions authorized by this section, or a retirement
system of a city or city and county established by its charter and providing
for modification of rights and benefits similar to and under the same
conditions as those provided for under this section. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 396   Dissolution of marriage.
   Notwithstanding any provision in this system to the contrary, whenever a
benefit payable to the surviving spouse under this systems terminates or is
reallocated because or the remarriage of the spouse, the termination or
reallocation of the benefit shall be only for the period of remarriage, and in
the event that the surviving spouse resumes the status of an unmarried person,
the benefit shall be fully reinstated or reallocated, as the case may be, to
the surviving spouse for said unmarried periods. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 397   Discharge of adverse claims.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5105 and 5125 or the Civil_Code of
the State or California, whenever any payment of benefits or refund is made by
the system to or on account of a member, such payment shall fully discharge
this system from all adverse claims, thereto unless, before such payment or
refund is made, the retirement system manager has received written notice by or
on behalf of some other person that such person claims to be entitled to such
payment or refund. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 398   Execution, etc.
   No right of a person to any benefit or refund under this article and no
funds of the retirement system shall be subject to execution, garnishment,
attachment, or any other process whatsoever, and no such right or funds shall
be assignable. (Adopted November 2, 1976)
§ 399   Continuation of "Section 399 plan."
   Subject to the requirements of section
374 of this Charter relating to enactment of ordinances providing for
continuance of employee retirement plans, sections
399 through 444 of the Sacramento City Charter are repealed as of the effective
date of these amendments. (Amended June 6, 1989)
§ 400   Implementation; administrative remedy; saving provision.
   The city council may at any time provide by ordinance for implementation of
any procedure, or for any matter arising due to unforeseen circumstances, or
for any remedy necessary to accomplish full transfer in an equitable manner or
all active safety employees to PERS, including but not limited to such hearing
procedures as may be required by Government_Code Section 21026 or any other
section of the Government_Code, procedures for any determinations required by
that code to be made by the city with respect to disability retirement, and any
provisions necessary to resolve questions relating to the following categories
of persons:
   (a)   Former SCERS safety members who have left city employment but are
covered by reciprocity provisions or agreements.
   (b)   Former SCERS safety members who have left city employment but who
elected deferred retirement and have left their contributions in the system.
   (c)   Former SCERS safety members who left city employment, were reemployed
by the city prior to the effective date of the new contract, again became SCERS
safety members, and who have redeposit rights which as of the effective date of
the new contract have not been exercised so as to receive service credit for
the break in service.
   (d)   Former SCERS safety members who left city employment and are
reemployed after the effective date of the new contract, and who did not elect
deferred retirement or leave their contributions in the system.
   (e)   Former SCERS safety members who retired for disability and who
returned to city employment pursuant to former (1989) Charter section 417 as a
miscellaneous employee, but who elected to retain safety membership.
   In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines in a final
judgment that all or any provision of this article or any new contract entered
into with the Public Employees' Retirement System, or any ordinance enacted
pursuant to this article is invalid, the city council shall provide by
ordinance for compliance with the terms and conditions of any such court order.
   The city council shall provide by ordinance, prior to the effective date of
any new contract, for an administrative appeal and remedy procedure to address
any claim made by a member of SCERS, any employee, any retiree or any
beneficiary that this article or any new contract entered into with the Public
Employees' Retirement System, or any ordinance enacted pursuant to this article
is invalid for any reason. As adopted, such procedure shall be mandatory, final
and binding on all parties thereto, and shall be reviewable only by court
proceedings instituted pursuant to Code_of_Civil_Procedure 1094.5. (Amended
June 6, 1989)
§ 401   Conflicting Charter provisions.
   Any section or part of any section in this Charter, insofar as it should
conflict with the sections of this article or with any part thereof, shall be
superseded by the contents of said sections. In the event that any word,
phrase, clause or section of these sections shall be adjudged unconstitutional,
the remainder thereof shall remain in full force and effect. (Amended June 6,
1976)
Article XVIII. Impartial and Binding Arbitration for Police Department Employee
Disputes
§ 500   Declaration of Policy.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Sacramento that
strikes by police officers are not in the public interest and should be
prohibited, and that a method should be adopted for peacefully and equitably
resolving disputes that might otherwise lead to such strikes. (Adopted November
5, 1996)
§ 501   Prohibition Against Strikes.
   If any police officer employed by the City of Sacramento wilfully engages in
a strike against the City, said employee shall be dismissed from his or her
employment and may not be reinstated or returned to City employment except as a
new employee. No officer, board, council or commission shall have the power to
grant amnesty to any employee charged with engaging in a strike against the
City. (Adopted November 5, 1996)
§ 502   Obligation to Negotiate in Good Faith.
   The City, through its duly authorized representatives, shall negotiate in
good faith with recognized police department employee organizations on all
matters relating to the wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of City
employment, including the establishment of procedures for the resolution of
grievances concerning the interpretation or application of a negotiated
agreement. Unless and until agreement is reached through negotiations between
authorized representatives of the City and a recognized employee organization
for the police department or a determination is made through the impartial
arbitration procedure hereinafter provided, no existing benefit, term or
condition of employment for said police department employees shall be altered,
eliminated or changed. (Adopted November 5, 1996)
§ 503   Impasse Resolution Procedures.
   (a)   All disputes or controversies pertaining to wages, hours or terms and
conditions of employment which remain unresolved after good faith negotiations
between the City and a police department employee organization shall be
submitted to a three-member Board of Arbitrators upon the declaration of an
impasse by the City or by the recognized employee organization involved in the
dispute.
   (b)   Representatives designated by the City and representatives of the
recognized employee organization involved in the dispute shall each select and
appoint one arbitrator to the Board of Arbitrators within three (3) days after
either party has notified the other, in writing, that it desires to proceed to
arbitration. The third member of the Arbitration Board shall be selected by
agreement between the City and the employee organization, and shall serve as
the neutral arbitrator and Chairperson of the Board. In the event that the City
and the recognized employee organization involved in the dispute cannot agree
upon the selection of the neutral arbitrator within ten (10) days from the date
that either party has notified the other that it has declared an impasse,
either party may then request the State Mediation and Conciliation Service of
the State of California Department of Industrial Relations to provide a list of
seven (7) persons who are qualified and experienced as labor arbitrators. If
the City and the employee organization cannot agree within three (3) days after
receipt of such list on one of seven (7) persons to act as the neutral
arbitrator, they shall alternately strike names from the list of nominees until
one name remains and that person shall then become the neutral arbitrator and
Chairperson of the Arbitration Board.
   (c)   Any arbitration proceeding convened pursuant to this Article shall be
conducted in conformance with, subject to, and governed by Title 9 of Part 3 of
the California Code_of_Civil_Procedure. The Arbitration Board shall hold public
hearings, receive evidence from the parties and cause a transcript of the
proceedings to be prepared. The Arbitration Board, in the exercise of its
discretion, may meet privately with the parties and mediate or medearb issues
in dispute. The Arbitration Board may also adopt such other procedures that are
designed to encourage an agreement between the parties, expedite the
arbitration hearing process, or reduce the costs of the arbitration process.
   (d)   In the event no agreement is reached prior to the conclusion of the
arbitration hearings, the Arbitration Board shall direct each of the parties to
submit, within such time limit as the Arbitration Board may establish, a last
offer of settlement on each of the remaining issues in dispute. The Arbitration
Board shall decide each issue by majority vote by selecting whichever last
offer of settlement on that issue it finds most nearly conforms to those
factors traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages,
hours, benefits and terms and conditions of public and private employment,
including, but not limited to the following: changes in the average consumer
price index for goods and services; the wages, hours, benefits and terms and
conditions of employment of employees performing similar services to the extent
that such can be reasonably done, including comparable classifications in
public employment in the Sacramento metropolitan area, and in the three
California cities next larger and the three California cities next smaller in
population than Sacramento; and the financial condition of the City of
Sacramento its ability to meet the costs of the decision of the Arbitration
Board.
   (e)   After reaching a decision, the Arbitration Board shall mail or
otherwise deliver a true copy of its decision to the parties. The decision of
the Arbitration Board shall not be publicly disclosed and shall not be binding
until ten (10) days after it is delivered to the parties. During that ten (10)
day period the parties shall meet privately, attempt to resolve their
differences, and by mutual agreement amend or modify the decision of the
Arbitration Board. At the conclusion of the ten (10) day period, which may be
extended by mutual agreement between the parties, the decision of the
Arbitration Board as it may be modified or amended by the parties, shall be
publicly disclosed and shall be binding on the parties. The City and the
employee organization shall take whatever action is necessary to carry out and
effectuate the arbitration award. No other actions by the City Council or by
the electorate to confirm or approve the decision of the Arbitration Board
shall be permitted or required.
   (f)   The expenses of any arbitration proceeding convened pursuant to this
Article, including the fee for the services of the chairperson of the
Arbitration Board and the costs of preparation of the transcript of the
proceedings shall be borne equally by the parties. All other expenses which the
parties may incur individually are to be borne by the party incurring such
expenses.
(Adopted November 5, 1996)
Article XIX. Impartial and Binding Arbitration for Fire Department Employee
Disputes
§ 600   Declaration of Policy.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Sacramento that
strikes by fire fighters are not in the public interest and should be
prohibited, and that a method should be adopted for peacefully and equitably
resolving disputes that might otherwise lead to such strikes. (Adopted June 2,
1998)
§ 601   Prohibition Against Strike
   If any fire fighter employed by the City of Sacramento wilfully engages in a
strike against the City, said employee shall be dismissed from his or her
employment and may not be reinstated or returned to City employment except as a
new employee. No officer, board, council or commission shall have the power to
grant amnesty to any employee charged with engaging in a strike against the
City. (Adopted June 2, 1998)
§ 602   Obligation to Negotiate in Good Faith.
   The City, through its duly authorized representatives, shall negotiate in
good faith with a recognized employee organization, which primarily represent
fire fighters, on all matters relating to the wages, hours, and other items and
conditions of City employment, including the establishment of procedures for
the resolution of grievances concerning the interpretation or application of a
negotiated agreement. Unless and until an agreement is reached through
negotiations between authorized representatives of the City and a recognized
employee organization, which primarily represents fire fighters, for the non-
management and non-confidential members of the fire department or a
determination is made through the impartial arbitration procedure hereinafter
provided, no existing benefit term or condition of employment for said non-
management or non-confidential fire department employees shall be altered,
eliminated or changed. (Adopted June 2, 1998)
§ 603   Impasse Resolution Procedures.
   A)   All disputes or controversies pertaining to wages, hours or terms and
conditions of employment for non-management and non-confidential employees
which remain unresolved after good faith negotiations between the City and a
recognized fire department employee organization, which primarily represents
fire fighters, shall be submitted to a three-member Board of Arbitrators upon
the declaration of an impasse by the City or by the recognized employee
organization involved in the dispute.
   B)   Representatives designated by the City and representatives of the
recognized employee organization involved in the dispute shall each select and
appoint one arbitrator to the Board of Arbitrators within three (3) days after
either party has notified the other, in writing, that it desires to proceed to
arbitration. The third member of the Arbitration Board shall be selected by
agreement between the City and the employee organization, and shall serve as
the neutral arbitrator and Chairperson of the Board. In the event that the City
and the recognized employee organization involved in the dispute cannot agree
upon the selection of the neutral arbitrator within ten (10) days from the date
that either party has notified the other that it has declared an impasse,
either party may then request the State Mediation and Conciliation Service of
the State of California Department of Industrial Relations to provide a list of
seven (7) persons who are qualified and experienced as labor arbitrators. If
the City and the employee organization cannot agree within three (3) days after
receipt of such list on one of seven (7) persons to act as the neutral
arbitrator, they shall alternately strike names from the list of nominees until
one name remains and that person shall then become the neutral arbitrator and
Chairperson of the Arbitration Board.
   C)   Any arbitration proceeding convened pursuant to this Article shall be
conducted in conformance with, subject to, and governed by Title 9 of Part 3 of
the California Code_of_Civil_Procedure. The Arbitration Board shall hold public
hearings, receive evidence from the parties and cause a transcript of the
proceedings to be prepared. The Arbitration Board, in the exercise of its
discretion, may meet privately with the parties and mediate or medearb issues
in dispute. The Arbitration Board may also adopt such other procedures that are
designed to encourage an agreement between the parties, expedite the
arbitration hearing process, or reduce the costs of the arbitration process.
   D)   In the event no agreement is reached prior to the conclusion of the
arbitration hearings, the Arbitration Board shall direct each of the parties to
submit, within such time limit as the Arbitration Board may establish, a last
offer of settlement on each of the remaining issues in dispute. The Arbitration
Board shall decide each issue by majority vote by selecting whichever last
offer of settlement on that issue it finds most nearly conforms to those
factors traditionally taken into consideration in the determination or wages,
hours, benefits and terms and conditions of public and private employment,
including, but not limited to the following: changes in the average consumer
price index for goods and services; the wages, hours, benefits and terms and
conditions of employment of employees performing similar services to the extent
that such can be reasonably done, including comparable classifications in
public employment in the Sacramento metropolitan area, and in the three
California cities next larger and the three California cities next smaller in
population than Sacramento; and the financial condition of the City of
Sacramento and its ability to meet the costs of the decision of the Arbitration
Board.
   E)   After reaching a decision, the Arbitration Board shall mail or
otherwise deliver a true copy of its decision to the parties. The decision of
the Arbitration Board shall not be publicly disclosed and shall not be binding
until ten (10) days after it is delivered to the parties. During that ten (10)
day period the parties shall meet privately, attempt to resolve their
differences, and by mutual agreement amend or modify the decision of the
Arbitration Board. At the conclusion of the ten (10) day period, which may be
extended by mutual agreement between the parties, the decision of the
Arbitration Board, as it may be modified or amended by the parties, shall be
publicly disclosed and shall be binding on the parties. The City and the
employee organization shall take whatever action is necessary to carry out and
effectuate the arbitration award. No other actions by the City Council or by
the electorate to confirm or approve the decision of the Arbitration Board
shall be permitted or required.
   F)   The expenses of any arbitration proceeding convened pursuant to this
Article, including the fee for the services or the chairperson of the
Arbitration Board and the costs of preparation or the transcript of the
proceedings shall be borne equally by the parties. All other expenses which the
parties may incur individually are to be borne by the party incurring such
expenses. (Adopted June 2, 1998)
