CHARTER OF THE CITY OF TEMPLE CITY
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the city of Temple City, county of Los Angeles, state of
California, do ordain and establish this charter as the organic law of said
city under and by virtue of the constitution of the said state.
Article I
Status Of City
Section 100. Name Of City.
The general law city, in existence prior to the effective date of this charter,
known as the "city of Temple City", shall be deemed, for all purposes, to
continue in existence, as a chartered city, from and after the effective date
of this charter. Said city, as a chartered city, shall continue to be known as
the "city of Temple City".
Section 101. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the city of Temple City, as a chartered city, shall be
identical to the boundaries of said city of Temple City, a general law city, as
were lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this charter. After the
effective date of this charter, the boundaries may be altered only as provided
by applicable or general law.
Section 102. Effective Date Of Charter.
This charter shall be effective from and after the date of its approval by the
legislature of the state of California.
Article II
Definitions And Interpretation Of Charter
Section 200. Definitions.
For the purpose of this charter, the following words and phrases shall be
deemed to have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, unless from the
context thereof a contrary meaning is clearly intended:
Adjudicated Newspaper shall mean a newspaper which is adjudicated as such
pursuant to the provisions of section 6000 et. seq. of the Government Code of
the state of California.
Applicable Law shall mean an enactment of the legislature which lawfully
governs, allows or regulates activities of cities having a charter adopted
pursuant to the provisions of the constitution.
Appointive Officers shall mean those officers designated as such by this
charter.
Ralph M. Brown Act shall mean that act of the state legislature entitled as
such, as the same now exists or as the same may hereinafter be lawfully
amended, designated as section 54950 et. seq. of the Government Code.
Charter shall mean this charter as it now exists, or as it may hereafter be
amended.
City shall mean the city of Temple City, established as a charter city by this
charter.
City Attorney shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting city attorney
of the city.
City Clerk shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting city clerk of
the city.
City Council shall mean the legislative body of city.
City Manager shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting city manager
of city.
City Treasurer shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting city
treasurer of city.
Constitution shall mean the constitution of the state of California.
Contractor shall mean any person or entity that has an existing contract,
agreement, or other arrangement to provide the city with goods, services, or
other items, or who has an interest in or expectation of obtaining such a
contractual arrangement in the future. The term shall include any agent or
representative of the contractor and where the contractor is a business entity
shall include all owners, shareholders, principals, partners, members,
officers, directors, and managers. The term contractor shall not include any
person or entity contracted to provide the services of an appointive officer of
the city.
Council Member shall mean a member of the city council of city.
County shall mean the county of Los Angeles.
Developer shall mean any person or entity who is currently seeking, or who has
an interest in or expectation of seeking from the city a specific plan, zone
change, development agreement, density bonus, subdivision tract map, or
conditional use permit for a sensitive use (i.e. adult business, massage
parlor, etc.), or an industrial or commercial use having a building area of
20,000 square feet or more. The term shall include any agent or representative
of the developer and where the developer is a business entity shall include all
owners, shareholders, principals, partners, members, officers, directors, and
managers.
Elections Code shall mean the Elections Code of the state of California as the
same exists as of the effective date of this charter, and as the same may
hereinafter be amended by lawful authority.
Elective Officers shall mean those officers designated as such by this charter.
Elector shall mean any person who qualifies for the right of suffrage pursuant
to article II, section 1 of the constitution of the state.
Former City shall mean the city of Temple City, a general law city, organized
and existing as such, prior to the effective date of this charter, and, as to
which the city is its successor in interest, by reason of the adoption of this
charter.
General Law shall mean an enactment of the legislature of the state which
lawfully governs, allows or regulates activities of a general law city, as
defined in section 34100 of the Government Code of the state of California,
which applies to the city of Temple City, solely by reason of the provisions of
this charter, or an ordinance adopted by the city council of the city.
Government Code shall mean the Government Code of the state of California as
the same exists as of the effective date of this charter, and as the same may
hereinafter be amended by lawful authority.
May is permissive.
Mayor shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting mayor of city.
Mayor Pro Tempore shall mean the duly appointed, qualified and acting mayor pro
tempore of city.
Municipal Affair shall mean those matters which have been, and continue to be,
held to be such by courts of record in the state of California.
Person shall mean any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust company or corporation, and any municipal, political or
governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city of
Temple City.
Registered Qualified Voter shall mean an elector who is lawfully registered,
pursuant to applicable provisions of the Elections Code, and is thus entitled
to cast a ballot in any national, state or local election held within the city.
Shall is mandatory.
State shall mean the state of California. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 201. Reference To Laws.
Wherever reference is made in this charter to any law or code provision enacted
by the legislature of the state, or to any constitutional provision, said
reference shall mean and include any amendment thereto, enacted after the
effective date of this charter; provided, however, if any such law is repealed
in whole or in part, the city council, by ordinance, may enact provisions,
consistent with this charter, covering the substance of such repealed
legislation.
Article III
Succession
Section 300. Rights And Liabilities.
The city shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be the successor in interest to
the former city. The said city shall succeed to, own, possess, hold and control
all rights, including, but not limited to, rights in and to personal and real
property owned, possessed, controlled or held by said former city as of the
effective date of this charter. Said city shall be deemed, for all purposes, to
be subject to all debts, obligations, liabilities and duties of the said former
city, as such existed as of the effective date of this charter.
Section 301. Validation Of Prior Acts.
All lawful acts heretofore taken by, or on behalf of, the said former city, by
its city council, or any officer, employee, commission, committee or board
thereof, shall be deemed, for all purposes, to continue in full force and
effect from and after the effective date of this charter. The validation of
such acts as provided for herein shall include, but not be limited to, all
lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or any portion thereof, in
force as of the effective date of this charter, except to the extent that any
such act is inconsistent, in whole or in part, with any provisions of this
charter; to that extent the same shall be deemed void for all purposes. Any
such act, so validated, shall be subject to amendment, modification or repeal
by lawful authority pursuant to this charter.
Section 302. Continuation Of Status Of Officers And Employees.
All officers and employees, including but not limited to, elective officers of
the said former city shall, as of the effective date of this charter, continue
to perform the duties of their respective offices and positions. Except as
otherwise expressly provided in this charter, the adoption hereof, as to such
officers and employees, shall not affect or impair any right, privilege or
retirement benefit of such officers and employees lawfully held by them as of
the effective date of this charter. The tenure of, and the performance of
duties by, all such officers and employees shall be subject to the provisions
hereof.
Section 303. Public Contracts.
All contracts law entered into by the said former city, prior to the effective
date of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect, notwithstanding
the adoption of this said charter.
Section 304. Pending Proceedings.
Any action or proceeding, civil, criminal or administrative, pending as of the
effective date of this charter, as to which the said former city, or any
officer or employee thereof, is a party or participant, shall not be affected,
altered or abated by reason of the adoption of this charter or by any provision
hereof. Any such action or proceeding shall be processed to its conclusion, in
accordance with all laws applicable thereto, notwithstanding the adoption of
this said charter.
Article IV
Powers Of City
Section 400. Powers.
The city, from and after the effective date hereof, shall have the power to
make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in respect to municipal
affairs, subject only to such restrictions and limitations as may be provided
in this charter, and in the constitution of the state of California. The said
city shall also have the rights, powers and privileges heretofore or hereafter
established, granted or prescribed by any lawful authority, including, but not
limited to, those rights, powers and privileges now or hereafter accorded to
general law cities, and such authority as a chartered city might lawfully
exercise under and by virtue of, the constitution of the state.
Section 401. Limitation Of Powers.
The enumeration in this charter of any specific power shall not be deemed, for
any purpose, to be a limitation upon the general grants of power, as set forth
in this charter.
Section 402. Exercise Of Powers.
The city shall exercise its powers in the manner established by applicable laws
of the state, unless a different procedure is established by this charter or by
an ordinance lawfully adopted by the city council of said city.
Section 403. Joint Powers.
The city may exercise all or any of the powers herein set forth singly or
jointly with other public agencies in the manner provided by general law.
Article V
Municipal Elections
Section 500. Conduct Of Elections.
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all municipal elections hereafter
conducted by or on behalf of the city shall be held and processed in accordance
with the provisions of the constitution and the Elections and Government Codes.
Section 501. Elective Officers.
The elective officers of this city shall be five (5) members of the city
council, each of whom shall hold the office of council member.
Elective officers of the city shall be elected for four year terms by the
registered qualified voters of the city, on an at large basis, at general or
special municipal elections, held for that purpose. General municipal elections
shall be conducted on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March of
even-numbered years, commencing in March of 2020 and as more fully set forth in
Elections Code section 2601.
To effectuate the change from odd-numbered to even-numbered years, the elective
officers holding office as of the effective date of this section shall have
their current terms extended by one (1) year.
(4/12/94; amd. Res. 16-5187; Res. 18-5347)
Section 502. Qualification For Elective Office.
The qualifications for any person to hold an elective office of the city shall
be as follows:
   A.   Any such person shall be an elector, within the meaning of the
constitution of the state; and
   B.   Any such person shall have been a bona fide resident of the city for at
least one year next preceding the date of the election at which he desires to
be a candidate for such elective office; and
   C.   A council member who has been elected or appointed to four four-year
terms whether consecutive or not, shall not be eligible to be a candidate for
election to the office of council member again. A council member elected or
appointed to serve two years or more of an unexpired term shall have that term
counted as a "four-year term" for purposes of this section. A council member
elected or appointed to serve less than two years of an unexpired term shall
not have that term counted as a "four-year term." This section shall apply
prospectively, meaning that it eliminates previous limitations on holding
office and shall apply to council members elected or appointed to office on and
after the effective date of this section. (Res. 16-5187)
Section 503. Incumbent Elective Officers.
All of the incumbent elective officers of the former city, shall continue in
such offices until the expiration of their respective terms for which they were
elected, and until their successors are appointed or elected, and qualified.
Section 504. Rights Reserved To The Electorate.
The electorate of the city, notwithstanding the adoption of this charter,
reserve unto themselves the following processes:
   A.   The right of referendum as to any legislative act taken by the city
council; and
   B.   The right of initiative, as to any legislative act the city council
could legally effectuate; and
   C.   The right of recall as to any elective officer of the city.
Such reserved rights shall be exercisable only in accordance with, and subject
to the limitations of, the provisions of the constitution of the state of
California and applicable laws.
Section 505. Vacancies.
Vacancies in elective offices shall be deemed to occur under any of the
following circumstances:
   A.   If, during the term of his office, an elective officer of the city
dies; or
   B.   If, during the term of his office, he ceases, for any reason, to be a
registered qualified voter and resident of the city; or
   C.   If, during the term of his office, an elective officer of the city
files a written letter of resignation with the city clerk, his office shall be
deemed vacant as of the date stated in such letter, or if no date is so stated
in such letter, upon the date of its filing;
   D.   If a city council member absents himself, without the consent of the
city council, from all regular city council meetings for a period of sixty (60)
consecutive days from the last regular meeting of the council he attended, his
office shall be deemed vacant; provided that the consent of the city council
shall be given only for good cause, but shall not be unreasonably withheld; or
   E.   If an elective officer of the city is convicted of any crime which
involves moral turpitude, such office shall be deemed vacant as of the date the
judgement of conviction becomes final. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 506. Other Offices.
No elective officer of the city, during his tenure as such, or for a period one
year thereafter, shall hold any other city office or employment.
Article VI
City Council
Section 600. Legislative Body.
The city council shall be the legislative body of the city.
Section 601. Mayor - Mayor Pro Tempore.
By the affirmative votes of not less than three (3) members, the city council
shall choose one of its members as mayor, and one of its members as mayor pro
tempore, upon the following occasions:
   A.   In even numbered years, at the regular council meeting held for the
purpose of canvassing the results of the general municipal election; and
   B.   In odd numbered years, at the first regular council meeting held during
the month of March; or
   C.   At such other times as a majority of the council shall so order.
The council member chosen as mayor shall, in addition to the performance of
this duties as a council member, preside at all city council meetings,
represent the city as the ceremonial head of city government, and perform such
other acts as may be required of him, as directed by the city council,
consistent with this charter, ordinance of the city or other applicable law. In
the case of the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall
act in his place and stead. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 602. Vacancies In Elective Offices.
Any vacancy occurring in any elective office of the city, may be filled by the
city council, by resolution, adopted by the affirmative votes of not less than
three (3) members of the city council. If the city council fails, for any
reason, to fill such vacancy within a period of thirty days from and after such
office becomes vacant, it shall within not to exceed six (6) months, call and
hold an election to fill such vacancy. A person appointed or elected to fill a
vacancy in an elective office shall hold such office for the unexpired term of
the former incumbent.
If at any time, three (3) or more vacancies occur in elective offices of the
city, then the following procedure shall take place:
   A.   If such situation qualifies under the provisions of a disaster as
provided by applicable law, and the city has provided for the preservation of
local government as provided thereunder, then such preservation shall be
observed; or
   B.   If such situation does not so qualify, or if such preservation has not
been provided, then the then chairman of the board of supervisors of the county
shall temporarily appoint qualified persons to such three or more vacant
offices for the limited purpose hereinafter set forth. Upon such persons being
so appointed, the city council as thus constituted, shall meet forthwith at a
time and place to be selected by the city clerk for the purpose of calling a
special election to elect qualified persons to the offices temporarily filled
by such appointments. Such temporary appointees shall continue to hold such
elective offices until their successors have been duly elected and qualified.
Section 603. Council Meetings.
   A.   Time And Place. Regular meetings of the city council shall be conducted
at such time and place as are established by ordinance.
   B.   Open To Public. Except as otherwise herein provided, each and every
meeting of the city council, be it a regular or special meeting, or an
adjourned regular or special meeting, shall be open to all members of the
general public.
   C.   Application Of Brown Act. Except as otherwise herein provided, the
provisions of the "Ralph M. Brown act" shall apply to all meetings and acts of
the city council, and its members.
   D.   Executive Sessions Of The City Council may be conducted only:
      1.   To consider the appointment dismissal or imposition of disciplinary
action with respect to any officer, employee or contractor of the city; or
      2.   To meet with the city attorney or other appointed special counsel of
the city, to consider matters relating to pending or potential litigation
involving the city; or
      3.   For such other purposes as are permitted by general law.
For the purpose of this section, an "executive session" shall mean a session of
the city council at which only council members and persons specifically
directed by the city council or authorized by applicable law shall be permitted
to attend.
   E.   Quorum. Three (3) members of the city council shall constitute a quorum
for the purpose of transacting business of the city council.
   F.   Oaths. The mayor, each member of the council and the city clerk shall
have the power to administer oaths or affirmations in proceedings pending
before the city council.
   G.   Subpoenas. The city council shall have the power to compel, by
subpoena, the attendance of witnesses, and the production of any relevant
evidence, at any meeting of the city council, or of any duly appointed board or
commission or at any hearing held before any officer or employee of the city.
Subpoenas shall be issued by the city clerk, upon order of the city council, in
the name of the city, and shall be served in the manner prescribed by
applicable law for the service of subpoenas in judicial actions. Disobedience
to a subpoena, or the refusal to testify to relevant matters before the city
council, except upon valid constitutional grounds, shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such.
   H.   Rules For Proceedings. The city council may establish rules for the
conduct of its proceedings, including, but not limited to, provision for the
punishment of any person who engages in disorderly conduct at a city council
meeting. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 604. Reimbursement For Expenses.
Council members of the city shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses actually
incurred in the performance of official duties. Such reimbursement shall not be
made, unless approved by the affirmative vote of not less than three (3)
members of the city council. The city council shall establish a procedure for
the reimbursement of other officers and employees of the city for expenditures
incurred by them in the performance of official duties. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 605. Compensation Of Council Members.
Compensation of council members, other than reimbursement for expenses, may be
established in the manner and amount as provided by general law, relating to
council member salaries in general law cities in this state. (Amended Res. 16-
5187)
Section 606. Ordinances.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter or by applicable law, the
enactment of ordinances by the city council, shall be accomplished in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   A.   Meetings. Ordinances may be adopted at either regular, special or
adjourned regular or special meetings of the city council.
   B.   Adoption Of Ordinances. Ordinances shall be adopted in the manner and
according to the procedure provided by general law.
   C.   Effective Date Of Ordinances. Ordinances shall be effective in the time
and manner provided by general law.
   D.   Vote Required. No ordinance of this city shall become effective unless
the same is adopted by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) members of
the council, except for ordinances for the adoption of which, this charter or
applicable or general law, requires a greater number of affirmative votes.
   E.   Form. Each ordinance shall bear a title which shall briefly describe
the subject matter of the ordinance and shall contain the following enacting
clause: "The City Council of the City of Temple City does ordain". Each
ordinance adopted by the city council shall be signed by the mayor, whose
signature thereon shall be attested to by the city clerk.
   F.   Violation. Penalty. A violation of any duly enacted ordinance of the
city shall constitute a misdemeanor which shall be prosecuted in the manner
prescribed by applicable law. The maximum fine or penalty for the violation of
any ordinance shall be in the sum of $500.00 or a term of imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
city council, by ordinance, shall provide for the place of imprisonment for
such violation and may provide that persons convicted of a violation of any
such ordinance may be compelled to perform labor on public works of the city.
   G.   Codification. Any and all ordinances of the city may be compiled,
consolidated, or recompiled and/or reconsolidated, and indexed and arranged in
a comprehensive municipal ordinance code. Such code may be adopted by
ordinance, by reference. Such code, if adopted by reference, need not be
published in the manner required for other ordinances, provided that:
      1.   Not less than three (3) copies thereof shall be on file in the
office of the city clerk, available for examination by members of the public,
prior to the adoption thereof; and
      2.   That the final adoption of such code shall not take place until a
public hearing is held before the city council to allow interested persons to
express their views on such proposed code; and
      3.   That notice of such public hearing is given by publication in an
adjudicated newspaper at least ten (10) days in advance of such hearing.
Detailed regulations pertaining to any subject, such as building regulations,
when arranged in a comprehensive code, including maps, charts or diagrams, may
also be adopted by reference in the manner provided in this section.
Amendments to such code shall be enacted only by ordinance and, if no adoption
by reference is involved, the procedure set forth in this sub-paragraph shall
not apply to such adoption.
Section 607. Contracts.
   A.   Council Action. No contract, for any purpose, shall obligate the city,
in any manner, unless and until such contract has been approved or ratified, in
written form, by the affirmative votes of not less than three (3) members of
the city council; except that:
      1.   Where a contractual expenditure by the city has been included in an
approved city budget, city council approval thereof shall be conclusively
presumed; and
      2.   Where the city manager reasonably determines that an emergency
immediately requires the obtaining of goods or services, he shall be empowered
to contract for the same without prior city council approval, and such contract
shall be a binding obligation of the city. The authority of the city manager
hereunder as to a particular emergency shall terminate at the next meeting of
the city council unless specifically extended.
   B.   Leases. No agreement for the lease of city owned property to any
person, for a non-municipal purpose, shall be valid unless the city council
finds that the property proposed for such lease is not required, and will not
be so required during the term of the agreement, for municipal purposes.
   C.   Supplies And Equipment. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section
relating to contracts, the city council shall, by ordinance, provide for the
acquisition of equipment, materials or supplies, other than for public works
contracts, if the same are included within a budget approved by the city
council.
   D.   Surplus Property. The city council may provide for a system for the
sale, disposal or exchange of real and/or personal property which is surplus to
the needs of the city.
   E.   Public Works Contracts. Except as otherwise herein provided, the city
shall contract for the construction or reconstruction of any public building,
works, streets, drain, sewer, utility, park or playground (hereinafter "public
project") in the time and manner and in accordance with general law.
Section 608. Franchises.
Franchises shall be granted by the city council only in the time and manner,
and for such purposes, as may be prescribed or authorized by the constitution
or by applicable laws of this state.
Section 609. Interference With Administrative Services.
No member of the city council shall interfere with the execution by the city
manager of his powers and duties; nor shall any council member direct the city
manager to appoint or remove any officer or employee of the city. Except for
the purpose of inquiry, no council member shall deal with the administrative
services of city except by and through the city manager; nor shall any council
member give any order or direction to any subordinate officer or employee of
city. This section shall not apply during periods of disaster proclaimed by the
governor or city council, nor during such times as there shall be no council
designated city manager acting in that capacity. (Amended Res. 16-5187)
Section 610. Conflict Of Interest.
The lawful provisions of applicable and/or general law, with regard to conflict
of interests, prohibited interests, and disclosure of assets shall apply to,
and govern the activities of each elective officer of the city.
In addition to the foregoing, elective officers of the city and candidates for
elective office shall not accept from any contractor or developer any campaign
contributions, including but not limited to direct donations, cash donations,
loans, in-kind donations, or other non-cash contributions. Elective officers of
the city shall also not accept from any contractor or developer any "gift" as
defined by the California political reform act or the fair political practices
commission regulations interpreting the act, without full reimbursement. (Res.
16-5187)
Article VII
Appointive Officers
Section 700. Form Of Government.
The system of government established by this charter shall be known as the
"council-manager" form of government.
Section 701. Appointive Offices.
The municipal offices, established by this article, shall be known as
appointive offices of the city. Persons shall be appointed to and removed from,
such offices by the city council, in accordance with the provisions hereof.
Section 702. City Manager. Appointment. Qualification. Compensation.
The appointive office of city manager for the city is hereby created. The
qualification, appointment, salary, duties, tenure and discharge of the city
manager shall be prescribed by ordinance of the city council.
Section 703. City Attorney. Appointment. Qualification. Compensation.
The appointive office of city attorney of city is hereby created. The city
attorney shall be directly responsible to the city council for the performance
of his duties.
   A.   Appointment. A qualified person shall be appointed to the office of
city attorney, by resolution of the city council, adopted by the affirmative
votes of not less than three (3) members thereof.
   B.   Compensation. The city council shall, from time to time, by resolution,
set the compensation for the office of city attorney.
   C.   Qualification. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the
office of city attorney, unless at the time of such appointment he is duly
licensed as an attorney at law by the state of California, and has engaged in
the practice of law for a period of not less than five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of such appointment.
Section 704. City Attorney. Duties.
The duties of the office of city attorney shall be a follows:
   A.   He shall act as the legal advisor for the city, and to its officers and
employees, in all matters relating to city affairs;
   B.   He shall be required to appear and defend the city in all matters in
civil litigation involving the city and its officers and employees. He shall
prosecute all violations of city ordinances, but may, with approval of the city
council, delegate such authority to the district attorney;
   C.   He shall prepare all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, opinions and
other legal documents as required by the city council, relating to the affairs
of the city; and
   D.   He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
city council.
Section 705. City Attorney. Deputies. Special Counsel.
The city attorney shall have the authority to appoint deputy city attorneys, to
act as such, under the control and direction of the city attorney. Compensation
for such deputies, if any, shall be set by the council. The city attorney may,
with the approval of the city council, engage the services of special counsel
to assist him in the performance of his said duties.
Section 706. City Attorney. Removal.
The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be
removed from such office, on 90 days notice, by the affirmative votes of not
less than three (3) members of the city council.
Section 707. City Clerk. Appointment. Qualification.
The appointive office of city clerk of city is hereby created. Such office may
be combined with that of any other appointive office. The city clerk shall be
appointed and removed by, and be responsible to, the city manager.
Section 708. City Treasurer.
The appointive office of city treasurer is hereby established. The duties of
the city treasurer shall be those imposed by applicable and/or general law,
except as those duties may be modified by ordinance of the city. The salary,
tenure, appointment and removal of the city treasurer shall be as prescribed by
the city council.
Section 709. Bonds.
The appointive officers shall post such fidelity bonds as may be required by
the city council. Such bonds shall be a proper charge upon the city.
Article VIII
Officers And Employees
Section 800. Merit System. Establishment.
The city council, by ordinance, may establish a merit system for city
employees. Such system may include provisions for the method of the selection
of employees, the classification, advancement, suspension, discharge,
termination of such employees, and the consolidation and elimination of
positions. The said merit system shall apply as to each office or position of
employment with the city, except:
   A.   Elective and appointive officers; and
   B.   Part-time or temporary officers and employees; and
   C.   Members of boards and commissions.
Such system may be amended, by ordinance of the city council, from time to
time, as may be required in the discretion of the city council in the public
interest.
Section 801. Retirement.
Plenary authority and power is hereby vested in the city, its city council and
its several officers and employees to do and perform any act, or exercise any
authority granted, permitted or required under the provisions of the public
employees' retirement act, as it now exists or hereafter may be amended, so as
to enable the city to continue as a contracting city under said retirement
system. The city may terminate any such contract with the board of
administration of the public employees' retirement system only under authority
granted the enabling act relating to said system.
Section 802. Compensation.
The city council, by resolution, shall from time to time establish the salaries
and/or other forms of compensation for each officer or employee of the city.
Article IX
Fiscal Administration
Section 900. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each
calendar year and shall end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year.
Section 901. Budget. Submission To City Council.
At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the
city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council, a proposed annual
budget, covering expected income and all proposed expenditures of city for the
forthcoming fiscal year. In preparing the budget the city manager shall utilize
the most accurate available income estimates and the most feasible combination
of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or
activity, and object.
Not less than ten (10) copies of the proposed budget, and the city manager's
budget message, shall be on file in the office of the city clerk, available for
examination by members of the general public. Upon submission of the budget,
the city council shall select a convenient date for the conduct of a public
hearing upon the adoption of such budget. Notice shall be given of such public
in such manner as the city council deems appropriate to give complete and
adequate notice thereof, to residents of the city. At the time of such public
hearing, the city council shall consider evidence presented by any interested
person concerning any or all of the items as contained in the proposed budget.
Upon conclusion of the said public hearing, the city council shall make such
alterations, deletions or additions to the budget as proposed, is in the public
interest, and thereafter, it shall approve the budget as revised. Such approval
shall take place prior to the commencement of the fiscal year to which such
budget relates. Upon its adoption, by the affirmative votes of at least three
(3) members of the city council, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing
fiscal year. The budget as approved shall be filed with the city clerk, and
shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of the public and of
departments, officers and agencies of the city.
At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the city council may amend or
supplement the budget, by motion, adopted by the affirmative votes of at least
three (3) members of the city council.
Section 902. Budget. Appropriations.
From and after the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated
therein as proposed expenditures, shall be deemed appropriated to the several
departments, offices and agencies for the respective objects and purposes
therein stated. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to
the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.
Section 903. Tax Levies.
The city council shall have the authority to levy property taxes in the same
time, manner and amount as is now, or hereafter, authorized by general law.
Section 904. Imposition Of Other Taxes.
The city council may, by ordinance, impose any other tax, in addition to those
specifically referred to in this charter, if such tax can lawfully be imposed
by a charter or general law city by virtue of the constitution of the state, or
by virtue of any general law.
Section 905. Tax Procedure.
The procedure for the assessment, levy and collection of all municipal taxes
and special assessment shall be prescribed by ordinance of the city council.
Section 906. Debt.
The city may incur debts, issue bonds, enter into long term leases or
contracts, or otherwise financially obligate itself over one or more years, in
the manner as is authorized by general law.
Section 907. Claims Against The City.
Claims for money or damages against the city or any officer or employee
thereof, and civil actions to enforce the same, shall be presented, filed and
acted upon in the time and manner as is prescribed by the Government Code of
the state of California, as the same now exists, or may hereafter be amended.
Section 908. Payment Of Claims And Demands.
The city council, by ordinance, shall provide for the method and manner for the
approval and payment of claims and demands against the city.
Article X
Board Of Education
Section 1000. Effect Of Charter On School Districts.
The adoption of this charter shall not have the effect of creating any new
school district nor shall the adoption of this charter have any effect upon the
existence, the boundaries or manner of operation of any school district located
within the boundaries of the city, wholly or partially, as of the effective
date of this charter. Each such present school district shall continue in
existence subject, in all respects, to the provisions of the constitution and
the laws of the state of California, as the same now exist or hereafter may be
amended.
Section 1001. Application Of State Law.
The manner, the time, tenure and terms of office, with reference to the members
of boards of education of such school districts, their qualifications,
compensation and removal and the number which shall constitute any one of such
boards, shall continue to be prescribed by the constitution and the laws of the
state of California, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.
Article XI
City Boards And Commissions
Section 1100. Creation Of Commissions.
The city council, by ordinance, may create such permanent or temporary boards
or commissions as it finds, in its judgment, are required to assist in the
performance of any municipal function. Any person appointed to any permanent or
temporary board or commission established by the city council pursuant to this
section shall be bound by the contribution and gift limitations applicable to
council members as set forth in article VI. (Res. 16-5187)
Section 1101. Enabling Ordinances.
An ordinance establishing a board or commission shall specify the following:
   A.   The number of members comprising such commission or board; and
   B.   Their term of office; and
   C.   The powers and duties assigned to the board or commission; and
   D.   The conditions under vacancies in membership shall occur automatically;
and
   E.   The qualifications for appointment to such board or commission; and
   F.   Such other matters as may be necessary, in the judgement of the
council, to enable the commission to perform its assigned functions.
Section 1102. Appropriation Of Funds.
The city council in its annual budget shall include an appropriation of funds
for each board or commission, in such amounts as it deems adequate for the
performance of the functions assigned to such bodies.
Section 1103. Appointment And Removal Of Members.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to section
1101 of this charter, any city contractor, developer, any employee of a city
contractor or developer, or any current city employee (whether full-time or
part-time) is not eligible for membership on any commission or board
established by the city council. Members of all commissions and boards of the
city shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of
said city council. Such appointments shall be made, by resolution, adopted by
the affirmative votes of not less than three (3) members of the city council.
Any members of a board or commission may be removed, with or without cause, at
any time by the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the city council.
Any vacancy on any board or commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be
filled by resolution, carried by not less than three (3) affirmative votes of
the city council. Upon a vacancy occurring leaving an unexpired portion of a
term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion
of such term. (Res. 16-5187)
Section 1104. Meetings. Conduct Of.
The meetings and acts of all commissions and boards, and members thereof, of
the city, shall be conducted and taken in accordance with the provisions of the
"Ralph M. Brown act". Each board or commission may adopt, by resolution, rules
for the conduct of its meetings, a copy of which shall be filed with the city
clerk.
Section 1105. Compensation. Expenses.
The city council, by resolution, may provide for reimbursement for expenses and
insurance coverage of board or commission members.
Section 1106. Secretary. Records.
The city manager shall provide the secretarial services for each board or
commission. The city manager shall insure the adequate preparation of the
minutes of board or commission meetings and shall maintain permanent files
containing copies of the minutes as approved by each such board or commission,
and other records relating thereto.
Section 1107. Existing Commissions.
Members of existing boards and commissions holding office as such, as of the
effective date of this charter, shall continue to hold such office thereafter
until their respective terms shall expire and their successors shall be
appointed and qualified or until they have been removed as set forth herein.
Article XII
Violations. Validity.
Section 1200. Violations.
The violation of any provision of this charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor
and be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not exceeding $500.00 or by
imprisonment for a term of not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
Section 1201. Validity.
If any provisions of this charter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is held judicially invalid, the remainder of the charter, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected thereby.
