FREEHOLDERS’ CHARTER OF THE CITY OF TULARE
(Filed with the Secretary of State February 3, 1923)
   (Statutes of 1923, P. 1508)
   As Amended April 24, 1933 (Statutes of 1933, P. 3043)
   As Amended May 24, 1935 (Statutes of 1935), P. 2640)
   As Amended March 26, 1954 (Statutes of 1953, P. 381)
   As Amended April 14, 1959 (Statutes of 1959, P. 5713)
   As Amended April 13, 1971 (Statutes of 1971, V2, Ch158, P. 4388-4394)
   As Amended April 8, 1975 (Stat. of 1975, V2, App. Chart. Ch10, P.45)
   As Amended November 2, 1982 (Stat. of 1982, V6, App. Chart. P. 138-139)
   As Amended November 5, 1996 (Statutes of 1997, Chart. Ch 7)
   As Amended November 2, 2004 (Statutes of 2005, Chart. Ch. 1)
   As Amended November 2, 2010 (Statutes of 2010, Chart. Ch. 14)
   As Amended June 5, 2012
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
   Section 1.   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of
Tulare, shall remain and continue a body, politic and corporate in the name in
fact and in law.
   The boundaries of the City of Tulare shall continue as now established until
changed in some manner authorized by law.
   Section 2:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
POWERS
   Section 3.   Said city shall have and may exercise all the powers heretofore
granted to the other municipalities of the state, also such as may be necessary
or appropriate to a municipal corporation and to the general welfare of its
inhabitants which are not prohibited by the constitution and which it would be
competent for this Charter to set forth particularly or specifically, and the
specification herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be
exclusive.
ELECTIVE OFFICERS
   Section 4.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) Elective Officers of
the City shall be five (5) Council Members, each elected from a separate
district.
   Section 5.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) In order to
transition to a district based election, on the 6th day of November, 2012, and
every four years thereafter during the general election there shall be  elected
by district three (3) Council Members. On the 4th day of November, 2014, and
every four years thereafter during the general election, there shall be elected
by district two (2) Council Members. The term of office of each of said
Elective Officers shall be four (4) years and until his/her successor is
elected and qualified.
   Section 6:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 7:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 8:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
VACANCIES
   Section 9.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) A vacancy in any
elective office, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by
the Council, such appointee to hold office until the next general Municipal
Election, when a successor shall be chosen by the electors for the unexpired
term. All appointees shall be qualified electors of the district which was
vacated. If the Council fails to agree or for any other reason does not fill
such vacancy within thirty (30) days after the same occurs, then such vacancy
shall be filled by the Mayor; provided, however, that if for any reasons the
seats of a majority of the Council shall become vacant, then the City Clerk
shall call a special election at once to fill the vacancies for the unexpired
terms, and the same shall be conducted as herein provided for general Municipal
Elections.
   If any officer of the City shall remove from the City, or absent himself/
herself therefrom for more than thirty (30) days consecutively without the
permission of the Council, or shall fail or qualify, or shall resign, or be
convicted of a felony, or be adjudged insane, his/her office shall thereupon
become vacant.
QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS
   Section 10.   (As Amended March 26, 1954; June 5, 2012) All elective
officers, at the time of their election, shall be qualified electors of their
district in the City of Tulare.
ELECTIONS
   Section 11.   (As Amended April 8, 1975; November 2, 2010) Except as
otherwise provided, all elections shall be held and conducted, as nearly as may
be, in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of California as amended
from time to time. The regular municipal elections shall be held in even-
numbered years at the same time as the general election for state offices for
the state of California, in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of
California as amended from time to time.
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
   Section 12.   (As Amended November 2, 2010) Ordinances may be initiated in
accordance with the Elections Code of the State of California as amended from
time to time. Referendum petitions protesting enacted legislation passed by the
Council under and in accordance with the constitution and general laws of the
state, may be circulated in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of
California as amended from time to time. Any elective officer shall be subject
to the recall in accordance with the provisions of the constitution and general
laws of the state, in accordance with the Elections Code of the Sate of
California as amended from time to time; and in the case an officer is
recalled, the office held by him/her shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled
by the Council as any other vacancy.
   Section 13.   (As Amended May 24, 1935) The legislative body of the City
shall be vested in a City Council to consist of five (5) members who shall
received as compensation the sum of $5.00 for each regular meeting attended by
them.
MEETINGS
   Section 14.   (As Amended November 5, 1996; November 2, 2004) The City
Council shall meet at the first regular session after certification of the
municipal election results, shall take the oath of office, shall choose one of
their number President, who shall be Ex-Officio Mayor and executive head of the
City. The Council shall hold regular meetings at least once in each month at
such times as they shall fix by ordinance, and may adjourn any regular meeting
to a date certain, which shall be specified in the order of adjournment, and
when so adjourned, such adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all
purposes. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by three
Council Members by giving prior written notice as required by the Brown Act.
All meetings of the Council shall be public, except for closed sessions as
permitted by state law, and held within the corporate limits of the City at
such places as may be designated by ordinance or Council action, excepting that
joint meetings with other public agencies may be held outside the city
corporate limits consistent with applicable state law.
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
   Section 15.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010) The Council shall act only by Ordinance, Resolution, or motion. All
proposed Ordinances shall be introduced in typewritten or printed form, and no
Ordinance shall be passed by the Council on the date of its introduction, nor
within five (5) days thereafter, nor at any time other than a regular meeting.
Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting minor changes, amendments or
modifications of a proposed Ordinance between the time of its introduction and
final passage, providing its general scope and original purpose are retained.
The affirmative vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to the passage of
any Ordinance or Resolution. All Resolutions and Ordinances shall be signed by
the President of the Council and attested by the City Clerk.
   The enacting clause of all Ordinances shall be "Be It Ordained by the
Council of the City of Tulare". All Ordinances, with the exception of the
annual appropriation Ordinance, shall contain but one subject, which shall be
clearly stated in the title.
   If any subject shall be embraced in an Ordinance or Resolution, which shall
not be expressed in its title, such Ordinance or Resolution shall be void only
as to such thereof as shall not be expressed.
   All Ordinances, except emergency Ordinances not subject to referendum before
final action thereon, must be passed to print and the following actions taken:
a summary of the ordinance, not to exceed fifty (50) words, with the "Ayes" and
"Noes", shall be issued in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Tulare for one (1) day; the ordinance with the "Ayes" and "Noes" shall be
available in at least one public place at the city offices; and, upon request
to the City Clerk, a copy of the ordinance shall be made available to any
citizen.
   No Ordinance shall be amended unless the whole Section to be amended be set
forth, as amended, and the original Section repealed.
POWER OF INVESTIGATION
   Section 16.   The Council, or a committee thereof, may investigate the
affairs of any department or the official acts and conduct of any official. It
shall have power to administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of books and papers, and may punish for contempt any person
failing to obey its subpoena or refusing to testify. No person shall be excused
from testifying, but his/her testimony shall not be used against him/her in any
criminal proceeding, other than for perjury.
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
   Section 17.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) There shall be the following appointive officers, boards
and commissions, who shall perform the duties assigned them by this Charter or
by Ordinance: City Manager, City Clerk, City Engineer, Public Works Director,
City Attorney, Finance Director, Chief of the Police Department, Chief of the
Fire Department, City Planning Commission, Recreation & Parks Director, Board
of Public Utilities Commissioners, and any other position designated as a
department head by city ordinance or resolution.
   The Council may, by Ordinance, provide for the appointment of all employees
of the City Government, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The
Council shall appoint the City Manager, City Clerk, and City Attorney, members
of all Boards and Commissions, and such other subordinate officers as in their
judgment may be deemed necessary, and fix their compensation.
   All appointive officers not appointed by the Council shall be appointed and
removed by the City Manager.
   All appointive officers shall, before entering upon the duties of their
office, take the oath herein prescribed for elective officers, and file with
the City Clerk bonds of some responsible Surety Company in such penal sums as
this Charter, or failing such provisions, as the Council may by Ordinance
direct.
   No provisions of this Charter shall be construed to prohibit the adoption of
an Ordinance providing for a personnel, merit, civil service, or other system
for the employment, tenure, discharge or retirement of employees.
CITY CLERK
   Section 18.   (As amended March 26, 1954)The City Clerk shall be the
custodian of the seal of the City; shall safely keep all books, records and
other documents required by this Charter or the laws of the State to be kept
and filed in his/her office. He/She shall be the Clerk of the Council. He/She
shall have the power to administer oaths. It shall be his/her duty to perform
all acts required of his/her by this Charter, by Ordinance, or by the laws of
the state.
CITY ATTORNEY
   Section 19.   The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, duly admitted
to practice in the courts of this state, and having practiced therein at least
two years. He/She shall represent the City in all litigation, including the
prosecution of criminal cases arising out of the violations of city ordinances.
He/She shall be the legal advisor of the Council, the City Manager, and all
other officers, boards and departments of the City, and shall give his/her
opinion in writing when requested in writing by any officer or board. He/She
shall draft all proposed ordinances, or resolutions, when requested to do so by
the Council, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
CITY MANAGER
   Section 20.   The Council shall appoint a City Manager. His/Her powers and
duties shall be as follows:
   a.   To see that all Ordinances are enforced.
   b.   (As amended March 26, 1954) To appoint, except as otherwise provided,
and subject to the provisions of any Ordinance providing for a personnel,
merit, civil service, or other system for the employment, tenure, discharge or
retirement of employees, all heads of departments, subordinate officials, and
employees, and remove the same, except as otherwise herein provided.
   c.   To exercise general supervision over all public utilities operating
within the City so far as the same are subject to municipal control.
   d.    To see that the provisions of all franchises, permits and privileges
granted by the City are fully observed, and to report to the Council any
violation thereof.
   e.   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   f.   Repealed November 2, 2004.
   g.   To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the
Council or the Mayor.
   h.   To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the conduct of any
officer or employee of the City.
   i.   To keep Council advised as to the needs of the City.
   j.   To devote his/her entire time to the interests of the City.
   k.   To appoint such advisory boards as he/she may deem best to serve
without compensation, to confer with him/her and assist him/her in his/her
work.
   Section 21:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 22:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
PURCHASE BY CONTRACT OR IN THE OPEN MARKET
   Section 23.   (As amended November 2, 1982; November 2, 2004; June 5, 2012)
When the expenditure required for the purchase of any supplies exceeds the sum
established by a policy through a resolution adopted by the City Council, the
Purchasing Agent shall advertise for sealed proposals in the manner hereinafter
prescribed for proposals for public work and the contract shall be awarded by
the Council to the lowest responsible bidder, provided that the Council may
reject all bids and order the Purchasing Agent to buy in the open market at a
price less than the lowest bid received from a responsible bidder, and provided
that if no bids are received, the Council may order the Purchasing Agent to buy
in the open market.
Until the Council shall otherwise provide by Ordinance, the Finance Director
shall act as Purchasing Agent.
FISCAL YEAR
   Section 24.   (As amended April 24, 1933) The fiscal year shall commence on
the first day of July.
   Section 25.   The Council shall by Ordinance provide for the assessment,
levy and collection of taxes. The tax levy authorized by the Council shall not
exceed one dollar ($1.00) upon each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed valuation of all real and personal property within the City exclusive
of the amount necessary to pay the principal of and interest on the bonded
indebtedness of the City, except by Ordinance approved, or adopted by the
affirmative vote of the majority of the people voting at a general or special
election.
ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
   Section 26.   (As amended April 14, 1959)On or before the second regular
meeting in May of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council an
estimate of revenue and expenditures for the ensuing year. It shall contain an
estimate of the probable revenue from all sources, the amount necessary to meet
the interest and principal of the bonded indebtedness of the City, and the
following information, arranged in parallel columns:
   a.   Detailed estimate of the expenses of conducting each Department, as
submitted by the Department.
   b.   Expenditures for the corresponding items for the last two (2) fiscal
years.
   c.   Expenditures of corresponding items for the current fiscal year,
including adjustments due to transfers between appropriations, and an estimate
of the expenditure necessary to complete the current fiscal year.
   d.   Supplies and materials on hand.
   e.   Such other information as the Council may require.
   f.   Recommendations of the City Manager.
   Sufficient copies shall be prepared by the City Manager to provide one for
each member of the Council, and to place two (2) copies on file in his office
for inspection by the public.
PUBLICATION OF THE BUDGET 
   Section 27.   (As amended April 14, 1959)Upon the receipt of this budget,
the Council shall proceed to consider the same. Before the final action is
taken, the City Manager, at the direction of the Council, shall publish for
general distribution, an abstract of the budget showing the principal items of
expenditure for each Department together with the changes in his/her
recommendation, if any, proposed to be made by the Council.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPROPRIATIONS
   Section 28.   (As amended April 13, 1971) Upon request of the City Manager,
the Council may, by Resolution, transfer any part of an unencumbered balance of
any appropriation to another purpose or object, or may, by Resolution,
authorize a transfer to be made between items appropriated to the same office
or department. At the close of each fiscal year, the unexpended balance of each
appropriation, against which no contracts or works or supplies are outstanding,
reverts to the general fund. Any money in the general fund otherwise
unappropriated may be appropriated by the Council at any time by Ordinance.
   No money shall be drawn from the City Treasury, nor obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in accordance with the appropriation
made by the Council or otherwise provided for herein.
   Section 29:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 30:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 31:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 32:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 33:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
PAYMENT OF MONEYS INTO THE TREASURY
   Section 34.   (As amended November 2, 2004)Every officer collecting or
receiving any moneys belonging to or for the use of the city, except when
otherwise provided by law or this Charter, shall pay the same into the City
Treasury and account therefor to the Finance Director daily. The Finance
Director shall direct the proper fund to be credited therewith.
   Section 35:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
   Section 36.   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, a
police force and such subordinate officers and employees as the City Council
may prescribe. The Chief of Police and City Manager shall adopt rules for the
government, discipline, equipment and uniform of the department, subject to the
approval of the Council.
CHIEF OF POLICE
   Section 37.   The Chief of Police shall have all the powers that are now or
may hereafter be conferred upon sheriffs and other peace officers by the laws
of the state. He/She shall be responsible for the execution of all laws and
ordinance and rules governing the Police Department. He/She shall have such
other powers and duties as may be conferred by the Council.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
   Section 38.   The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief and such Fire
Fighters and other employees as the Council may determine. The Chief and City
Manager shall prescribe rules for the government of the department.
   Section 39:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 40:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 41:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 42:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 43:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 44:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
   Section 45.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004)The City Engineer
shall be a Civil Engineer, duly licensed under the laws of the State of
California. The Public Works Director shall be head of the Department of Public
Works. He/She shall have all such powers and duties as are conferred on him/her
by this Charter or by Ordinance. He/She shall be ex-officio Superintendent of
Streets. The Public Works Director may be, but is not required to be, the City
Engineer. The Department of Public Works shall have charge of all public works
relating to streets, street cleaning, water, sewers, sewage disposal, garbage
disposal, and the construction and operation of all public utilities owned and
operated by the City, except as otherwise provided herein.
PUBLIC WORKS TO BE DONE BY CONTRACT
   Section 46.   (As amended November 5, 1996; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) All public buildings and work, when the expenditure
therefor shall exceed the sum established by a policy through a resolution
adopted by the City Council, shall be done by contract, and shall be let to the
lowest responsible bidder, after advertising one (1) time in a daily newspaper
of general circulation, for sealed proposals for the work contemplated.
Provided, that the Council may reject any and all bids, if deemed excessive,
and re-advertise for bids to provide for the work to be done by the Department
of Public Works.
   All contracts shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall
be signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk.
   No contract is valid, except in the case where the work to be done is to be
paid for by special assessment, unless the Finance Director shall endorse
thereon his/her certificate that there remains an unexpended balance of an
appropriation or proceeds of a bond issue applicable thereto.
PENALTY FOR COLLUSION
   Section 47.   If at any time it shall be found that the person, firm or
corporation to whom the contract has been awarded has, in presenting any bid or
bids, colluded with any other party or parties, then the contract so  awarded
shall be null and void, and the contractor and his/her sureties shall be liable
to the City for all loss or damage which the city may suffer thereby, and the
Council may advertise anew for bids for said work.
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
   Section 48.   There shall be a City Planning Commission established,
governed and maintained under and pursuant to the provisions of the generals
laws of the state.
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
   Section 49.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004) The Department
of Parks and Recreation shall consist of a Recreation, Parks and Library
Director, and such other employees as the Council may provide. The Director
shall have complete charge of the parks and reservations of the City, except as
otherwise limited in this Charter. The Director and City Manager shall make
rules for the use of the parks and the preservation of the trees, shrubs,
lawns, etc., subject to the approval of the City Council. The Council may
designate any of the employees of the Parks Department as special police
officers and, as such, they shall have the powers and duties within the parks
and reservations of the City as would be possessed by regular police officers.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
   Section 50.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
ADVISORY BOARD OF HEALTH
   Section 51.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Section 52.   (As amended April 14, 1959; November 2, 2004)There is hereby
created a Department of Public Utilities. Said department shall be under the
control and management of a board of five (5) commissioners. Said Board shall
be known as the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners, and the members of
such Board shall be known as the Commissioners of said department. Said Board
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council, who shall hold office for four (4) years and until their successors
are appointed and qualified; they may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Council by a majority vote.
   The Board shall hold regular meetings at a regular meeting place within the
corporate limits of the City of Tulare. All meetings shall be public. The
members of the Board shall receive as compensation the sum of $5.00 each for
each regular meeting attended by them, and necessary expenses incurred by them
shall be properly charged against the City, and when certified by the Finance
Director shall be paid.
   Section 52a.   As soon as practicable after the first day of July in each
year, the Board shall organize by electing one of its members President and one
Vice President, which officers shall hold office for one year and until their
successors are elected, unless their membership on the Board sooner expires.
The election of each succeeding President and Vice President shall be held at
the meeting of the Board during the last week in July of each year. The Board
may fill the unexpired term of any vacancy occurring in the office of President
or Vice President. All meetings shall be in a public office of the Board, with
reasonable provision for attendance by the public.
   Section 52b.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Board shall appoint the City
Clerk as secretary of the Board and the Finance Director as chief accounting
employee. The secretary shall keep a record of the proceedings and transactions
of the Board, specifying therein the names of the Commissioners at all meetings
and giving the ayes and noes upon all votes. He/She shall post and publish all
orders, and resolutions and notices which the Board shall order to be posted or
published, and shall perform such other duties as are herein or may be by order
of the Board imposed upon him/her.
   Section 52c.   The Board of Public Utilities shall have power (subject to
the provisions of this Charter and to such Ordinances of the City as are not in
conflict with the grants of power made to this department of the City
government elsewhere in this Charter) to supervise, control, regulate and
manage the department and to make and enforce all necessary and desirable rules
and regulations therefor and for the exercise of the powers conferred upon the
department by this Charter. It shall have such additional powers and perform
such other duties as may be granted or imposed elsewhere in this Charter, or by
Ordinance not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. No grant of
power by this Charter to this department of the City government shall be
construed to restrict the power of the Council to enact Ordinances under the
police power of the City except as otherwise specifically provided in this
Charter.
   Section 52d.   The power conferred by this Charter upon the Board shall be
exercised by order or resolution adopted by a majority of its members and
recorded in the minutes with the ayes and noes at length. Such action shall be
attested by the signature of the President or Vice President, or two members of
the Board, and by the signature of the secretary of the Board.
   Section 52e.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Department of Public
Utilities shall have the power to use a corporate seal, to sue and be sued, and
to have perpetual succession; it shall have the power and duty:
   1.   To acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend, manage, and control
works and property for the purpose of supplying the City and its inhabitants
with water and electric energy, gas, heat, sewers, transportation, telephone
and telegraph service, ice or other systems of providing and distributing
refrigerating means, materials and service, or any of them, and to acquire and
take, by purchase, lease, condemnation, or otherwise, and to hold, in the name
of the City, all property situated within or without the City, and within or
without the state, that may be necessary or convenient for such purpose. To
borrow money for any or all of such purposes on terms and conditions prescribed
by said Board, said indebtedness to be payable only out of the revenue fund
pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of which such indebtedness
was created.
   2.   To regulate and control the use, sale, and distribution of water,
electric energy, gas, transportation, and other utility owned or controlled by
the City; the collection of rates therefor and the granting of permits for
connection with said water or electric works or gas or transportation or sewer
or other utilities; and to fix the rates to be charged for such connection; and
subject to approval of the Council by Ordinance or Resolution, to fix by
contract or otherwise and for a term deemed reasonable by the Board the rates
charged for water or electric energy, or gas, or transportation, or any other
utility for use within or without the City, and to prescribe the time and the
manner of payment of the same; provided that, except as hereafter otherwise
prescribed, such rates shall be of uniform operation as near as may be, and
shall be fair and reasonable taking into consideration, among other things, the
nature of the use, the quantity supplied, and the value of the service;
provided further that the rates inside the City may be less, but no greater,
than the rates outside the City for the same or similar uses.
   3.   To supply and distribute, at rates fixed as hereinbefore provided, any
surplus water or surplus electric energy or surplus gas or surplus of any other
utility owned or controlled; and subject to the approval of the Council by
Ordinance, to fix by contract or otherwise the rates to be charged for public
utilities for use without the City, and to prescribe the time and the manner of
the same.
   4.   At the discretion of the Board, to divide the work of the department
into as many bureaus as the number of public utilities it controls, and to
discontinue such bureaus and to consolidate the work of any such. In case such
division is made, the General Manager, subject to confirmation by the Board,
shall have the power to appoint a manager for each bureau, who shall operate
under and shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the General
Manager for the entire department. Each such manager shall be directly
responsible to the General Manager and shall have such powers and duties as
shall from time to time be conferred on by the General Manager.
   5.   In the event that all or any portion of a utility is acquired by the
Department of Public Utilities under a contract providing for the payment in
whole or in part of the purchase price thereof out of revenues to be obtained
from said utility, then, at its option, to appoint an agent, corporate or
individual, to have charge of and to manage the said utility, so far as may be
permitted by law, pending the time that the revenues of the utility shall pay
the full purchase price thereof. In the event of the appointment of such agent
by contract, the provisions of sections affecting the powers and duties of the
manager and of the manager of such utility shall be suspended as to such
utility during the term of such contract.
   6.   To sue and to be sued, and to require the services of the City Attorney
in all cases to which the Board or Department is a party, provided that the
Board may employ other attorneys to assist the City Attorney therein, with the
latter's written approval.
   7.   To lease, for a term not exceeding five years, any or all of the lands
under its control for agricultural or other purposes, which shall not conflict
with the beneficial uses of said lands by the City for the purposes for which
they are held by the Board; and except as otherwise provided in this Charter,
to sell, from time to time, such personal property, placed under its control,
as shall not be longer necessary or suitable for the use of such Department.
The Board shall have the right, in conjunction with the joint use of pipe
lines, poles, or pole facilities, to buy, sell, or lease fractional interests
in pipe lines, poles or pole facilities owned or controlled by said other
utilities or by said Board. No real property nor any rights or interests in
real property held by said Board shall be sold, leased, or otherwise disposed
of, or in any manner withdrawn from its control, save as above provided, unless
by written instrument duly authorized by Ordinance of the City and a Resolution
of the Board, and duly executed by the City and the Board.
      No water or water rights nor any of the following property now or
hereafter owned or controlled by the City, to wit; gas, electric energy, or the
right to develop electric or other power by means of any water or water right
now or hereafter owned or controlled by the City, shall ever be sold, leased,
or disposed of, in whole or in part, without the assent of two-thirds of the
qualified voters of the City voting on the proposition at a general or special
election, at which such proposition shall be lawfully submitted, and no water
shall ever be sold, supplied, or distributed to any person or corporation,
other than municipal, for resale, rental, or disposal to consumers or other
persons. Neither shall any electric power or gas ever be sold, supplied or
distributed to any person or corporation other than municipal for resale,
rental or disposal to consumers or other persons without the assent of two-
thirds of the qualified voters of said City given, as aforesaid; provided that
nothing in this section contained shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
sale and distribution by the City of water, gas, and electric energy to its own
inhabitants for their own use, or to prevent the supplying or distribution by
the City of surplus electric energy or gas to consumers or municipal
corporations outside of the City, as elsewhere in this Charter provided.
   8.   To control, and order, except as otherwise in this Charter provided,
the expenditure of all money received for the sale or use of water, or from any
other source in connection with the operation of said water works, and all
money received from the sale or use of electric energy or from any other source
in connection with the operation of said electric works, and all money received
from the sale or use of gas or of transportation or of any other public
utility, or from any other source in connection with the operation of said
public utilities; provided that all money pertaining to each of said utilities
shall be deposited in the City Treasury to the credit of a special fund created
for each of said utilities; and the money so deposited in each special fund
shall be kept separate and apart from other money of the City and shall be
drawn only from said fund upon demands authenticated by signature of the
Finance Director. Any interest or increment received on the money in any such
special fund shall be paid into such special fund and become a part thereof.
   Section 53.   (As amended May 24, 1935)None of the money in or belonging to
any of said special revenue funds shall be appropriated or used for any purpose
except the following purposes pertaining to the municipal works from or on
account of which such money was received, to wit:
   1.   For the necessary expenses of operating and maintaining such works.
   2.   For the payment of the principal and interest or either due or coming
due under contract or upon outstanding notes, certificates or other evidences
of indebtedness issued against revenue of such works or bonds or other evidence
of indebtedness, general or district, heretofore or hereafter issued for the
purpose of such works or parts thereof.
   3.   For the necessary expenses of constructing, extending, and improving
such works, including the purchase of lands, water rights, and other property;
also the necessary expenses of conducting and extending the business of the
department pertaining to such works; also for reimbursement to another bureau
on account of services rendered, or materials, supplies, or equipment
furnished; also for expenditures for the purpose for which bonds, or evidences
of indebtedness shall have been authorized, subject to reimbursement as soon as
practicable from monies derived from the sale or issuance of such bonds or
evidence of indebtedness.
   4.   For establishing and maintaining a reserve fund to insure payment at
maturity of the principal and interest on all bonds and all other contract
obligations not outstanding or hereafter issued or made for the purchase of
municipal works and such other reserve funds pertaining to such works as the
Board may provide for by Resolution subject to approval of the Council by
Ordinance. The money set aside and placed in such fund or funds so created
shall remain in said fund or funds until expended for the purpose thereof, and
shall not be transferred to any other fund of the City. Any interest or
increment received on the money in any such special fund shall be paid into
such special fund and become a part thereof.
   5.   Any balance may be appropriated for use in any ensuing fiscal year or
years or be transferred to the general fund of the City with the consent of the
Board of Public Utilities, and not otherwise.
   Section 53a.   The Board may provide for the cost of acquisition of a public
utility and or extensions and or betterments of said public utility from funds
from the sale of bonds, general or district, and/or from revenues received from
said works to which such acquisition, extensions, and betterments pertain and/
or from the proceeds of loans contracted in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter.
   Whenever in the exercise of such power to provide for the cost of
acquisition of a public utility and/or extensions and/or betterments from such
revenues, the Board may deem it advisable to make any such acquisition,
extension or betterment which cannot be provided for out of the appropriations
for a single fiscal year, it may at any time adopt a special budget and make
special appropriations therefor specifying the amount of such appropriation for
each fiscal year during which the cost of such acquisition, extension or
betterment is expected to be paid, and when such special budget is so adopted,
said Board may incur financial obligations and make expenditures as authorized
thereby; provided that no such special appropriation for a future fiscal year
shall be made unless, on report of the Manager, it shall find that the
reasonably expected revenues of such works in each fiscal year for which such
appropriation is made will be amply sufficient to permit the making of such
appropriation in addition to the following:
   1.   Appropriations to cover the necessary expenses of operating and
maintaining such works, and such payments of principal and interest on
outstanding bonds, as, under the provisions of this Charter, and findings or
resolutions provided for therein, said Board is required to apportion and set
apart;
   2.   Appropriation to cover all sums coming due in said year for principal
and interest upon notes, certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued
under the provisions of this Charter;
   3.   Appropriations to cover all appropriations made by any prior special
budget; and
   4.   Appropriations to cover all other reasonably anticipated expenses for
said year.
   Any such special budget shall be subject to modification or extension upon
like report and finding. It shall be the duty of the Board in adopting the
annual departmental budget for each fiscal year to include therein
appropriations for each item for which an appropriation for that year has been
made by any such special budget.
   Section 53b.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Board shall each year
apportion and set apart out of the revenue fund in the city treasury pertaining
to each such municipal works an amount or amounts sufficient to pay at maturity
all sums coming due in said year for principal and interest, upon all
outstanding general bonds, and/or other obligations issued for the purposes of
the works, to which such revenue fund pertains, and also all sums coming due in
said year for principal and interest upon all outstanding district bonds,
issued for such purposes or such part of the last mentioned sums as can be paid
from moneys in said fund not appropriated to other purposes and the Board finds
are not required to meet outstanding obligations or liabilities payable out of
said fund, including the principal and interest of general bonds, and/or other
obligations; and said amounts shall be transferred forthwith into a special
fund in the city treasury, to be designated by name indicating the nature or
purpose of such special fund, and the money in such special fund shall be
subject to apportionment by the Finance Director as may be required to make
such payments on the principal and interest of said bonds and/or other
obligations, and for no other purpose. Any interest or increment received on
the money in any such special fund shall be paid into such special fund and
become a part thereof. The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to
all such bonds now outstanding or hereafter issued; except as in this section
provided said Board may, at its discretion, apply the moneys in such revenue
funds to such purposes permitted by this Charter and in such order and such
amounts as in the exercise of such discretion it shall determine. Balances
remaining unexpended in said revenue funds, and all sums receivable into said
fund from unpaid bills of consumers and other similar sources at the close of
any fiscal year shall be available for appropriations for, and expenditures in,
succeeding fiscal years in like manner and for like purposes as revenues
received during such succeeding years. The Board shall appoint and shall have
the power to remove the General Manager who shall be the chief administrative
officer. The City Manager may be appointed General Manager.
   Section 53c.   Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the rules of the
department and instructions of this Board, said General Manager shall have the
power and duty:
   1.   To administer the affairs of the department as its chief administrative
officer.
   2.   To appoint, discharge, suspend, or transfer the employees of the
department, other than the secretary of the Board and the chief accounting
employee of the department, and to issue instructions to said employees, other
than the secretary and the chief accounting employee, in the line of their
duties.
   3.   To expend the funds of the department in accordance with the provisions
of the budget appropriations or of appropriations made subsequent to the
budget.
   4.   To recommend to the Board prior to the beginning of each fiscal year an
annual departmental budget covering the anticipated revenues and expenditures
of the department, conforming as far as practicable to the forms and dates
provided in this Charter in relation to the general city budget.
   5.   To certify all expenditures of the department to the chief accounting
employee.
   6.   To exercise such further powers in the administration of the department
as may be conferred upon him/her by the Board.
   Section 53d.   Repealed: April 13, 1971.
   Section 53e.   The Board shall provide suitable quarters, equipment, and
supplies for the department. It shall create the necessary positions in said
department, authorize the necessary deputies, assistants and employees and fix
their salaries and duties, and fix the salary of the General Manager and may
require bonds of any or all such employees for the faithful performance of
their duties.
   Section 54.   (As amended May 24, 1935)Whenever in this Charter provision is
made for the discharge of specific duties by a specific appointee, the
appointing power of such appointee may designate an employee or employees in
the same department with full power to act in place of such appointee in case
of his/her temporary absence or other inability to act; and in other cases upon
the written request of such appointee.
   Section 55.   (As amended May 24, 1935; November 2, 2004)The Board shall,
prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, adopt an annual departmental budget
and make an annual departmental budget appropriation covering the anticipated
revenues and expenditures of said department. Such budget shall conform, as far
as practicable, to the forms and times provided in this Charter for the general
city budget. Such budget shall contain a sum to be known as the "unappropriated
balance", which sum shall be available for appropriation by the Board later in
the ensuing fiscal year to meet contingencies as they may arise. A copy of such
budget, when adopted, and of every Resolution subsequently adopted making
appropriations from said unappropriated balance shall promptly be filed with
the City Council and Finance Director. No expenditure shall be made for
financial obligations incurred by such department except as authorized by the
annual department budget appropriation, or appropriations made subsequent to
said annual budget, or as otherwise provided in this Charter. Provided,
however, and anything contained in this Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Board shall have power at any time to pledge said
unappropriated balance, or to contract with reference therefor, for any of the
purposes set forth in this Charter.
   Section 55a.   (As amended November 2, 2004)No money shall be drawn from any
fund under the control of such department, except upon warrants authenticated
by the signature of the Finance Director, who shall be directly appointed by
the Board and shall be directly responsible to it in the discharge of his/her
duties. The Board, by resolution, may authorize a temporary substitution in the
case of the absence or inability to act of the person whose signature is herein
required.
   Section 56.   Repealed: June 5, 2012.
   Section 56a.   1.   The Board is hereby authorized to borrow money from the
federal government or the state government, or any duly authorized agency
created by either said government and acting therefor, to defray the expenses
of construction work in the department.
   The principal and interest of such borrowed money shall be paid from the
revenue fund pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of when such
indebtedness was created, and the principal shall be repaid in not more than
forty (40) years, no payments of principal need be required the first three (3)
years following the date of any such loan.
   2.   The Board is hereby authorized to make contracts providing for
expenditure or incurring financial obligations to be paid in whole or in part
in succeeding fiscal years, for or on account of the acquisition of any public
utility, and of extensions and improvements of the works under the control of
said department, all payments under said contracts to be made out of the
revenue fund pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of which such
indebtedness was created.
FRANCHISES
   Section 57.   The general power of the Council to grant franchises for the
construction and operation of public utilities in the streets and public
grounds of the City of Tulare shall be exercised as provided in this article,
and not otherwise.
   Section 58.   No franchise shall be granted except by ordinance, specifying
the streets or other public grounds to which the same may apply.
PUBLIC LIBRARY
   Section 59.   The public library of the City of Tulare shall be maintained
and managed in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state.
BOARD OF EDUCATION
   Section 60:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 61:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 62:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 63:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 64:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
   Section 65:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 66:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
ORDINANCES TO REMAIN IN EFFECT
   Section 67.   All lawful ordinances of the City of Tulare, including
resolutions and regulations of the several boards and commissions in force and
effect at the time this Charter takes effect, and not inconsistent therewith,
shall remain in force until duly amended or repealed.
GENERAL MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   Section 68.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) All fees, fines or other moneys collected by the Library
and by the Recreation & Parks departments shall be paid into the city treasury
daily.
   Section 69.   (As amended March 26, 1954; November 2, 2004)At the beginning
of each fiscal year the Council shall designated Certified Public Accountants
or qualified Public Accountants, duly licensed by the State Board of
Accountancy or the State of California, who, at such time or times specified by
the Council, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of
financial transactions of the city government, and shall submit their reports
to the Council and to the City Manager, and shall, at the end of the fiscal
year, submit a final report to the Council and to the City Manager, a copy of
such report to be placed on filed with the City Clerk for inspection by the
general public.
   Such Accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of the city government, or any of its officials; they shall not
maintain any accounts or records of the City business, but within the
specifications approved by the Council, shall post audit the books and
documents kept by the Finance Director, and any separate or subordinate account
kept by any office, department or agency of the city government.
   Section 70.   No officer, board, or member of any board, of this city shall
recommend the appointment of, appoint, vote for or elect, to any office,
position of employment, in any department of the city government, any person
related by consanguinity or connected by marriage with such officer or such
member, or with any member of such board. A breach of this section shall be
cause for removal of any such officer, board or member of such board.
   Section 71.   (As amended March 26, 1954; November 2, 2004)Except as
otherwise provided for by law, this Charter, or by Ordinance, all public
offices shall be kept open every day of the business week, as determined by the
City Council, except legal holidays, and all books and records of every officer
and department shall be open to the inspection of any citizen at any time
during business hours, subject to the proper rules and regulations of the
efficient conduct of the business of each department or office.
   Section 72.   All general laws of the State applicable to municipal
corporations, now or hereafter enacted, and which are not in conflict with the
provisions of this Charter or with Ordinances or Resolutions hereafter enacted,
shall be applicable to the City.
   Section 73.   Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, any officer or
board authorized to appoint any deputy, clerk, assistant or employee, shall
have the right to remove the person so appointed.
   Section 74.   All officers and employees, when this Charter takes effect,
shall continue to hold and exercise their respective offices or employment,
under the terms of this Charter until the election or appointment and
qualification of their successors.
   Section 75.   No Council Member shall in any manner attempt to influence the
City Manager in the making of any appointment or in the purchase of supplies. A
violation of this provision shall work a forfeiture of the office of the
Council Member.
   Section 76.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
TAKING INTO EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER
   Section 77.   If this Charter be approved by the 1923 session of the State
Legislature, then for the purposes of nominating and electing candidates for
Council Member, City Auditor, Treasurer and Police Judge and for the exercise
of the initiative referendum and recall, this Charter shall take effect from
the time of its approval by said legislature. For all other purposes it shall
take effect on the first day of May, 1923.
